yet none gives the lie to it except the transgressor immersed in sin ;
o mankind ! be wary of your lord who created you from a single soul , and created its mate from it , and from the two of them scattered numerous men and women . be wary of allah , in whose name you adjure one another andblood relations . indeed allah is watchful over you .
the deeds of the unbelievers are like a mirage which a thirsty man thinks is water until he goes near and finds nothing . instead he finds god who gives him his due recompense . god 's reckoning is swift .
and why was it not that , when you heard it , you would have said , “ it does not befit us to speak regarding this ; purity is to you , o allah – this is a great accusation . ”
here there is a host of the confederates only to be defeated .
andwhen you said ,  o musa ! we can not endure one kind of food . so invoke your lord for us to bring forth for us of what the earth grows , its herbs , its cucumbers , its fum , its lentils and its onions .  he said ,  would you exchange that which is better for that which is lower ? go you down to any town and you shall find what you want !  and they were covered with humiliation and misery , and they drew on themselves the wrath of allah . that was because they used to disbelieve the ayatof allah and killed the prophets wrongfully . that was because they disobeyed and used to transgress the bounds .
how will you comprehend what hutama is ?
that is jesus , the son of mary - the word of truth about which they are in dispute .
we have sent down clear instructions to you , and illustrations fromof those who have gone before you , and a warning for those who take heed for themselves .
the jews and christians call themselves the beloved sons of god . , ask them ,  why does god punish you for your sins ? in fact , you are mere human beings whom he has created . he forgives and punishes whomever he wants . to him belongs all that is in the heavens , the earth , and all that is between them and to him do all things return .
so we took him and his soldiers and threw them into the sea . so see how was the end of the wrongdoers .
those who were followed will then disown those who followed them , and they will see the retribution , and ties between them will be severed .
and your lord inspired to the bee ,  take for yourself among the mountains , houses , and among the trees andthat which they construct .
on that day god will give them due recompense and they will know that god is the supreme judge .
and make me one of the inheritors of the paradise of delight ;
they said : hast come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us , if thou art of the truthful .
and when hell-fire shall be kindled to fierce ablaze .
if you punish them , they are your servants ; but if you forgive them , you are the mighty and wise . ”
by the lote tree beyond which none may pass
were allah to take humans to task because of what they have earned , he would not leave any living being on its back . but he respites them until a specified time , and when their time comes , , for allah has been watching his servants .
and the jews say : uzair is a child of god ; and the nazarenes say : the masih is a child of god . that is their saying with their mouth , resembling the saying of those who disbelieved aforetime . may allah confound them ' . whither are they turning away !
on the day that they see it , it will be as though they had not tarried but the latter part of a day or the early part of it .
why , when you heard it , did the believing men and women not of their own account think good thoughts , and say , 'this is a manifest calumny ' ?
there is a sickness in their hearts which allah has increased . for them there is a painful punishment because they lie .
he said : nay , do ye throw ! then lo ! their cords and their staves , by their magic , appeared to him as though they ran .
he said :  get ye down , both of you , - all together , from the garden , with enmity one to another : but if , as is sure , there comes to you guidance from me , whosoever follows my guidance , will not lose his way , nor fall into misery .
they shall circuit between it and boiling hot water .
remember , we saved you from the pharaoh 's people who wronged and oppressed you and slew your sons but spared your women : in this was a great favour from your lord .
so he began with their bags , before his brother 's bag . then he pulled it out of his brother ’ s bag . thus we devised a plan for joseph ; he could not have detained his brother under the king ’ s law , unless god so willed . we elevate by degrees whomever we will ; and above every person of knowledge , there is one more learned .
thereupon they threw down their ropes and their rods , and said :  by the glory of pharaoh , we shall prevail . 
had we sent this quran down on a mountain , you would have seen it trembling , crumbling in awe of god . these parables we cite for the people , so that they may reflect .
we have realized that we could never thwart god on earth and that we would never be able to thwart him by flight .
your people have rejected the quran , although it is the truth . tell them that you are not their guardian
your lord expands the provision for whomever he wills , and restricts it . he is fully informed , observant of his servants .
had we opened a door for them in the sky through which they could easily pass ,
when the sun shall be folded up ,
and wedescend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs what is before us and what is behind us , and what is between those two , and your lord is never forgetful ,
we will bring torment from the sky on this town because of the evil-deeds of its inhabitants  .
say :  my lord , forgive and have mercy . you are the best of the merciful . 
he may say ; wealth have i squandered in abundance !
this is of the tidings of the unseen which we inspire in thee . thou wast not present with them when they fixed their plan and they were scheming .
as a means of sustenance for you and your animals ?
they said ,  call upon your lord for us that he may make plain to us what it is !  he said ,  he says , 'verily , it is a cow neither too old nor too young , butbetween the two conditions ' , so do what you are commanded . 
there they shall abide forever : a blessed dwelling and a blessed resting place .
who insist on being given full when they take from others ,
the unbelievers said to their apostles :  we shall drive you out of our land , or else you come back to our fold .  their lord then communicated to them :  we shall annihilate these wicked people ,
never be misled by the bustle of the faithless in the towns .
a book we have revealed to you abounding in good that they may ponder over its verses , and that those endowed with understanding may be mindful .
how many ancient generations did we destroy ? they cried out for help , but it was too late for them to escape .
and the ships that glide with ease .
when the earth will tremble , shivering .
and paradise will be brought close to the pious , not far away from them .
will be in the scorching wind and boiling water ,
when a sign came to them they said : 'we will not believe in it unless we are given that which the messengers of allah have been given ' but allah knows best where to place his message . humiliation with allah shall befall the sinners as well as a terrible punishment for what they devised .
god is the exalted one who took his servant one night for a visit from the sacred mosqueto the aqsa mosque . god has blessed the surroundings of the aqsa mosque . he took his servant on this visit to show himevidence of his . it is he who is all-hearing and all-aware .
, mention in the bookthe story of mary how she left her family and started living in a solitary place to the east
he said : so . thy lord saith : it is easy for me . andthat we may make of him a revelation for mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a thing ordained .
revile not those whom they invoke besides allah , lest they may spitefully revile allah without knowledge . thus fair-seeming unto every community we have made their work . then unto their lord is their return , and then he will declare unto them that which they were wont to work .
say thou : who is there that will protect you from allah if he intendeth to bring evil on you or intendeth mercy for you ? and they shall not find for themselves , besides allah , a patron or helper .
and make not your oaths , a means of deception among yourselves , lest a foot may slip after being firmly planted , and you may have to taste the evilof having hinderedfrom the path of allah , and yours will be a great torment .
when your lord said to the angels : “ verily i am creating a human being from clay .
say : believe therein or believe not , lo ! those who were given knowledge before it , when it is read unto them , fall down prostrate on their faces , adoring ,
but ] turned awayalong with his hosts , and said :  a sorcerer , or a madman . 
or , is theirs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend bymeans !
he would have tarried in its belly till the day when they are raised ;
and the levied tair . they were all obedient to him .
say : shall i inform you of something better than that ? for those who keep from evil , with their lord , are gardens underneath which rivers flow wherein they will abide , and pure companions , and contentment from allah . allah is seer of his bondmen ,
you follow your religion and i follow mine .
and earth -- he set it down for all beings ,
our lord ! and make us submissive unto thee and of our seed a nation submissive unto thee , and show us our ways of worship , and relent toward us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the relenting , the merciful .
surely those who have taken the calfwill suffer the anger of their lord , and disgrace in the world . that is how we requite those who fabricate lies .
there is none that can avert it ;
whatsoever has been given you is the stuff this life is made of , and only its embellishment . what is with your lord is better and abiding . will you not understand ?
and nuh 's people belied the sent ones .
god is the one who raised the heavens without a pillar as you can see . then he established his control over the realm and made the sun and moon subservient to him . each of them will remain in motion for an appointed time . he regulates all affairs and explains the evidenceso that perhaps you will be certain of your meeting with your lord .
and also a tree that springeth forth from mount sinai , that groweth oil and is a sauce for the eaters .
or do they intend a plan ? but those who disbelieve - they are the object of a plan .
they were resolved to repel the beggars .
who has created and shaped ,
but theycontrived a plot , and god did the like ; and god 's plan is the best .
that they may understand my speech .
when their eyes fall on the inmates of hell they will say :  o lord , do not place us in the crowd of the vile . 
the wickedness of each of that is hateful to your lord .
and by oath of the soul that reproaches itself .
like satan when he said to the human , 'disbelieve ' ; then as soon as he disbelieved , he said , 'indeed , i am innocent of you , surely , i fear allah , the lord of all the worlds '
among them are those who promised god : “ if he gives us of his bounty , we will donate and be among the upright . ”
speak to him gently . he may possibly take heed or may come to have fear . 
and of mankind is he who would sell himself , seeking the pleasure of allah . and allah is full of kindness toslaves .
but the evil results of their deeds overtook them , and that veryat which they had scoffed hemmed them in .
the wrongdoers will meet the same fate as their predecessors , let them not ask me to hasten on ,
and those who disbelieve say : what ! when we have become dust and our fathers , shall we certainly be brought forth ?
they shall have layers of fire above them , and layersbelow them : with this doth allah warn off his servants :  o my servants ! then fear ye me ! 
and when we exacted a covenant from the prophets , and from theeand from noah and abraham and moses and jesus son of mary . we took from them a solemn covenant ;
has he peeped into the unknown , or obtained a promise from ar-rahman ?
upon that day the unbelievers , those who have disobeyed the messenger , will wish that the earth might be levelled with them ; and they will not conceal from god one tiding .
they are those whose hearts , hearing and sight are sealed by allah ; they are the heedless .
by the dawn when it lightens !
which one of mighty powers hath taught him ,
 rememberwhen he saved you from the people of pharaoh who oppressed and afflicted you , and slew your sons and spared your women . in this was a great trial from your lord . 
unto him thou payest regard .
we sent moses with our signs and clear authority
but he who performs good deeds , whether man or a woman , and is a believer , will surely enter paradise , and none shall be deprived even of an iota of his reward .
those who read the book of god and attend to their prayers and spend in charity in private and in public out of what we have provided them , may hope for a commerce that suffers no loss .
he thinketh that his wealth will render him immortal .
we do not send angels except with the truth . then they shall have no respite .
go with this letter of mine and lay it before them , then withdraw from them and see how they respond . 
“ you have come to us individually , just as we created you the first time , leaving behind you everything we gave you . we do not see with you your intercessors—those you claimed were your partners . the link between you is cut , and what you had asserted has failed you . ”
and i am commanded this , in order i may be the first of those who submit .
then the sects have differed among themselves ; so woe to those who disbelieve in the witness of a day mighty !
he causes the night to enter the day and causes the day to enter the night , and he is knowing of that within the breasts .
 ah ! woe to me ! would that i had never taken so-and-so as a friend !
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of the verses of his lord ; then he turns away from them ? indeed we , from the criminals , will take retribution .
whoever thinks that allah will not assist him in this life and the hereafter , let him stretch a rope to the ceiling , then let him cutoff , then let him see if his struggle will take away that at which he is enraged .
say thou : everyone is on the watch ; so watch , and anon ye shall know who are the fellows of thee even path and who hath let himself be guided .
so when they returned to their father , they said , ‘ father , the measure has been withheld from us , so let our brother go with us so that we may obtain the measure , and we will indeed takecare of him . ’
and smoothed things for him .
he said ,  it will be so ! your lord says , 'it is easy for me for i created you when you were nothing before . ' 
and we granted them clear signs in affairs : it was only after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into schisms , through insolent envy among themselves . verily thy lord will judge between them on the day of judgment as to those matters in which they set up differences .
then after them we sent moses and aaron with our signs to the pharaoh and his nobles ; but they behaved arrogantly , for they were a people full of guilt .
who shall bring to you every skilful sorcerer . 
on the day that allah will raise them all upand show them the truthof their conduct . allah has reckoned its , though they may have forgotten it , for allah is witness to all things .
if they could find a refuge or some caves or any place to enter , they would turn to it while they run heedlessly .
for when it was said to them , 'there is no god but god , ' they were ever waxing proud ,
and we gave them the clear book ,
the blame is only against those who wrong people , and are wrongfully insolent in the earth , for them there is a painful punishment .
let not their words grieve you . we have knowledge of all that they conceal and all that they reveal .
those who , if we give them power in the land , establish worship and pay the poor-due and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity . and allah 's is the sequel of events .
it is only the devil who would makefear his partisans . fear them not ; fear me , if ye are true believers .
whenever it is said to them ,  spread not disorder on the earth  , their reply is ,  we only seek to put things aright  .
whether you speak out aloud , he knows what is said secretly , and even that which is most hidden .
we never sent a messenger but that he should be obeyed by the leave of allah . if whenever they wronged themselves they had come to you praying to allah for forgiveness , and had the messenger prayed for their forgiveness , they would indeed have found allah all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and , when it is recited to them , they say ,  we believe in it . indeed it is the truth from our lord . even before it came , we had submitted ourselves . 
whenever we sent any messenger or prophet before you , and he recited anything , satan tampered with it . but god abrogates satan 's interjections and then he firmly reaffirms his revelations . god is all knowing and all wise .
the angels ask the people whose souls they remove while they were wronging themselves , “ what were you engaged in ? ” they reply , “ we were powerless in the land ” ; the angels say , “ was allah ’ s earth not spacious enough for you to have migrated in it ? ” the destination for such is hell ; and a very wretched place to return .
is he then , who will strike his face against the awful doom upon the day of resurrection ? and it will be said unto the wrong-doers : taste what ye used to earn .
and allah 's is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he forgiveth whomsoever he will and tormenteth whomsoever he will ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
causing no headiness or intoxication .
until gog and magog are let loose to rush down from the hills .
if anythingpertaining to your wives is not reclaimed from the faithless and then you have your turn , then give to those whose wives have left the like of what they have spent , and be wary of allah in whom you have faith .
salamunbe upon nuh among the 'alamin ! 
roaring over the hearts
said ,  that is what we were seeking .  so they returned , following their footprints .
this is how we relate the former tidings to you ; and we have given you a remembrance * from ourselves .
so if they deny you , , say ,  your lord is the possessor of vast mercy ; but his punishment can not be repelled from the people who are criminals . 
for a guidance and a mercy to the good-doers
seek haste then they with our torment ?
we gave moses the book to completefor the righteous ones , the book that contained a detailed explanation of all things , a guide and a mercy so that perhaps they would have faith in the day of judgment .
o sister of aaron , your father was not a wicked person , nor your mother sinful ! 
god has fulfilled his promise to you , and you defeated them by his leave ; until when you faltered , and disputed the command , and disobeyed after he had shown you what you like . some of you want this world , and some of you want the next . then he turned you away from them , to test you ; but he pardoned you . god is gracious towards the believers .
we have charged man , that he be kind to his parents ; but if they strive with thee to make thee associate with me that whereof thou hast no knowledge , then do not obey them ; unto me you shall return , and i shall tell you what you were doing .
they said marvellest thou at the decree of allah ? mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , people of the house , verily he is praiseworthy , glorious .
such is allah . your lord , the creator of everything there is no god but he . wither then are ye straying away ?
so would you perhaps , if you turned away , cause corruption on earth and sever yourrelationship ?
it is he who shapes you in your mothers ' wombs as he wills . there is no god except him , the almighty , the wise .
when the son of mary was cited as an example , behold , your people raise an outcry .
neither your creation nor your raising is anything but as a single soul ; surely allah is hearing , seeing .
god will admit the righteously striving believers to the gardens wherein streams flow . god has all the power to do whatever he wants .
and the dwellers in al-hijr deniedmessengers .
and let the latter follow them ?
say ,  it is god who always saves you fromand from all kinds of distress . even then , you consider idols equal to god . 
noble , virtuous .
the unbelievers will not cease to be in doubt about it until the hour suddenly comes upon them , or the chastisement of an ominous day overtakes them .
father , i have been given some knowledge which has not come to you , so follow me : i shall guide you along a straight path .
eat then , only that over which god 's name has been pronounced , if you truly believe in his revelations .
exalted and purified ,
and of mankind is he who worshippeth allah as on edge ; if there befalleth him good , he in contented therewith , and if there befalleth him a trial , he turneth round on his face ; he loseth the world and the hereafter : that indeed is a loss manifest !
and when a chapter is sent down that “ accept faith in allah and fight along with his noble messenger ” , the men of means among them seek exemption from you and say , “ leave us , for us to be with those who sit . ”
he created man from a small seed and lo ! he is an open contender .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
we have made it a reminder and an advantage for the wayfarers of the desert .
you are but a human like ourselves . produce for us a sign , if you are of the truthful '
and they say :  why are not signs sent down to him from his lord ? say :  the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner . 
, thus do we recount to you the events of the past , and we have bestowed upon you from ourself an admonition .
we have indeed made that a punishment for the unjust .
these are their houses in utter ruin , for they did wrong . verily , in this is indeed an ayahfor people who know .
have they not been created from some source , or are they themselves the creators ?
straightforward , that it may warn of a severe violence from before him , and bring glad tidings to the believers who work righteous works that theirs shall be a goodly hire .
o children of adam ! if there come unto you apostles from amongst you recounting my signs unto you , then whosoever shall fear god and amend , on them no fear shall come nor they shall grieve .
have they not regarded all things that god has created casting their shadows to the right and to the left , bowing themselves before god in all lowliness ?
in it there are clear signs and the station of abraham ; whoever enters it becomes secure . pilgrimage to the house is a duty owed to allah by all who can make their way to it . as for those who refuse to follow his command , surely allah does not stand in need of anything .
or do they have gods to defend them other than us ? they are unableto help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
then we revealed to moses : 'now , throw down your staff ' and thereupon it swallowed up their false invention .
when you see them , their appearance impresses you . and when they speak , you listen to what they say . they are like propped-up timber . they think every shout is aimed at them . they are the enemy , so beware of them . god condemns them ; how deluded they are !
so they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct and the result of their conduct was ruin .
( apart from their spouses and their slave women , for then they are not blameworthy ;
whatsoever of mercy allah may grant unto mankind none there is to withhold it ; and whatsoever he may with hold none there is to release it thereafter . and he is the mighty , the wise .
and never comes there unto them a reminder as a recent revelation from the most beneficent , but they turn away therefrom .
we therefore sent a violent thunderstorm towards them in their days of misfortune , in order to make them taste a disgraceful punishment in the life of this world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is more disgracing , and they will not be helped .
, leave them alone to eat and enjoy themselves and let their desires deceive them ; they will soon know .
the human being will recall whatever he has done .
why then did the gods they had taken apart from god as propitiators , not come to their aid ? in fact they strayed away from them . it was all a lie what they had contrived !
say to those who disbelieve , “ you will be defeated , and rounded up into hell—an awful resting-place . ”
 the lord of the heavens and the earth , and all between , - exalted in might , able to enforce his will , forgiving again and again . 
believers , do not make unlawful the pure things which god has made lawful for you . do not transgress for god does not love the transgressors .
those who spend their wealth for the cause of allah and afterward make not reproach and injury to follow that which they have spent ; their reward is with their lord , and there shall no fear come upon them , neither shall they grieve .
so that we bring down stones of clay upon them
indeed abraham was among his followers ,
with goblets , beakers , and cupsout of clear-flowing fountains :
lo ! abraham was a nation obedient to allah , by nature upright , and he was not of the idolaters ;
just imagine the day when we shall muster from every nation a large group of those who gave the lie to our signs , and they shall be duly arranged in ranks
and those who break the pact of allah after its ratification , and sever what allah has commanded to be joined , and spread turmoil in the earth – their share is only the curse and their destiny is the wretched abode .
did they not know that god determines and increases the sustenance of whomever he wants . in this there is evidencefor the believing people .
and that you approach not the property of the orphan , save in the fairer manner , until he is of age . and fill up the measure and the balance with justice . we charge not any soul save to its capacity . and when you speak , be just , even if it should be to a near kinsman . and fulfil god 's covenant . that then he has charged you with ; haply you will remember .
lord , give them double the punishment , and curse them with a great curse . ”
and whenever any prophet came to them , they only mocked at him .
rejoicing in the bounty that allah has given to them and having glad tidings in those who remain behind and have not joined them , for no fear shall be on them neither shall they sorrow ,
among the people is he who trades in distracting tales ; intending , without knowledge , to lead away from god ’ s way , and to make a mockery of it . these will have a humiliating punishment .
he said ,  my lord , indeed i have wronged myself , so forgive me ,  and he forgave him . indeed , he is the forgiving , the merciful .
that is surely no great matter for god .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and in the earth , and unto him all matters are returned .
then turns it into black stubble .
the unbelievers say ,  why have not some miracles been sent to him , , from his lord .  say ,  god causes whomever he wants to go astray and he guides those who turn to him in repentance
on that day he will say to them ,  call on those whom you thought to be my partners .  and they will call on them , but their prayer will not be heard ; and we shall place a barrierbetween them .
do they seek a religion other than the religion of god , when everything in the heavens and the earth has submitted to him , willingly or unwillingly ? to him they shall all return .
musa said to them : cast what you are going to cast .
so , do not think , , that allah will go back upon his promise to his messengers . surely allah is mighty , lord of retribution .
andwhen admonished do not take admonition ,
the messengers were sent to give people the glad newsand warn themso that the human being would not have any objections against god , after the coming of the messengers , . god is majestic and all-wise .
yet , they toy with their doubts .
 verily i am thy lord ! thereforeput off thy shoes : thou art in the sacred valley tuwa .
so when musa had fulfilled the term , and he journeyed with his family , he perceived on this side of the mountain a fire . he said to his family : wait , i have seen a fire , maybe i will bring to you from it some news or a brand of fire , so that you may warm yourselves .
‘ and as for the unjust – they are the fuel of hell . ’ ”
before themrejected messengers , - the people of noah , and 'ad , and pharaoh , the lord of stakes ,
by mount sinai ,
bring your book , if you speak truly !
like satan , when he said to man , 'disbelieve ' ; then , when he disbelieved , he said , 'surely i am quit of you . surely i fear god , the lord of all being . '
all this happened in order that allah may recompense the truthful for their truth , and may punish the hypocrites if he would , or relent toward them . verily allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
when the word falls on them , we shall bring forth for them out of the earth a beast that shall speak unto them : 'mankind had no faith in our signs . '
we raised mountabove them because of our solemn promise to them . also , we told them to prostrate themselves when entering the gateand not to commit transgression on the sabbath . we made a solemn covenant with them .
do not marry , from now on , the ex-wives of your fathers for that custom was sinful , loathsome , and abominable .
remember , when you said to moses :  we shall not believe in you until we see god face to face ,  lightning struck you as you looked .
save iblis ; he waxed proud , and was one of the unbelievers .
praising him are the seven heavens , and the earth , and everyone in them . there is not a thing that does not glorify him with praise , but you do not understand their praises . he is indeed forbearing and forgiving .
and his kin that harboured him
ifwere our will , we could send down to them from the sky a sign , to which they would bend their necks in humility .
who sees you when you stand up .
saying , 'deliver to me god 's servants ; i am for you a faithful messenger ,
make ready for an encounter against them all the forces and well-readied horses you can muster that you may overawe the enemies of allah and your own enemies and others besides them of whom you are unaware but of whom allah is aware . whatever you may spend in the cause of allah shall be fully repaid to you , and you shall not be wronged .
as for those who believe and do good deeds—for them are the gardens of bliss .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . yet were it not for a specified time , the punishment would have surely overtaken them . surely , it will overtake them suddenly while they are unaware .
say : o allah ! owner of sovereignty ! thou givest sovereignty unto whom thou wilt , and thou withdrawest sovereignty from whom thou wilt . thou exaltest whom thou wilt , and thou abasest whom thou wilt . in thy hand is the good . lo ! thou art able to do all things .
surely we will cause to come down upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven , because they transgressed .
for those who believe and do the right is forgiveness and gracious provision .
these are they of whom allah knoweth whatsoever is in their hearts : wherefore turn thou from them and exhort them , and say unto them for their souls , effectual saying .
he was created of gushing water
as though they had not dwelt there . a far removal for midian , even as thamud had been removed afar !
by him who created the male and the female :
and also divided the quran believing in some parts and rejecting others .
lo ! the day of decision is a fixed time ,
we called out to him ,  abraham ,
move not thy tongue concerning theto make haste therewith .
ye can not escape in the earth , for beside allah ye have no protecting friend nor any helper .
allah has promised you much booty that you will takeand has hastened for you thisand withheld the hands of people from you - that it may be a sign for the believers andhe may guide you to a straight path .
doors for their houses , couches on which to recline ,
he is the ever-living : there is no god but he . so call upon him , consecrating to him all your devotion . all praise and thanks be to allah , the lord of the whole universe .
your lord knows that you keep vigil nearly two thirds of the night and sometimes half or onethird of it , and a party of those with you . allah measures thenight and the day . he knows that you can not count it , and turns to you . therefore , recite from the koran as much as is easy ; he knows that among youthere are the sick and others traveling the road seeking the bounty of allah ; and others fighting in the way of allah . so then , recite from it as much as is easy . establish your prayers , pay the obligatory charity , and lend allah a generous loan . whatever good you shall forward to your souls ' account , you surely will find it better with allah , and a mightier wage . and supplicate for the forgiveness of allah . allah is the forgiving , the merciful .
they will recline upon carpets lined with rich brocade ; and the fruits of both these gardens will be within easy reach .
inclining towards him – and fear him , and keep the prayer established , and never be of the polytheists .
and granted you an exalted reputation ?
skulking from the people because of the evil of that which hath been announced unto him : shall he keepit with ignominy or bury it in the dust ! lo ' . vile is that which they judge !
for every community there is an appointed term ; and when its term arrives , they can not tarry behind a moment , nor can they get ahead .
and pray :  my lord ! i seek your refuge from the suggestions of the evil ones ;
o ye who believe ! take not the jews and the nazarenes as friends : friends they are to each other : and whosoever of you befriendeth them , verily he is of them ; verily allah guideth not a wrong-doing people .
they pour hearsay vanities , and most of them are liars .
verily that which ye are promised is sure to arrive , and ye can not escape .
what ! do they say ,  he has forged a falsehood against allah  ? but if allah willed , he could seal up thy heart . and allah blots out vanity , and proves the truth by his words . for he knows well the secrets of all hearts .
indeed allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he it is who confers life and causes death . you have no protector or helper apart from allah .
then the idols and those who strayed will be hurled into the fire headlong , one upon another ,
which strips away the scalp .
surely allah knows all that they conceal and all that they disclose . he certainly does not love those who are steeped in arrogance .
when the imminentbefalls
he is the supreme above his creatures ; and he is the wise , the aware .
blessed be he in whose hands is dominion ; and he over all things hath power ; -
and we ordained that he refused suck at first , untilsaid :  shall i point out to you the people of a house that will nourish and bring him up for you and be sincerely attached to him ?  ...
and indeedmessengers were mocked before you , but their scoffers were surrounded by the very thing that they used to mock at .
and lo ! thy lord ! he is indeed the mighty , the merciful .
you cause the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night . you bring forth the living out of the dead , and you bring the dead out of the living , and you give sustenance to whom you will beyond all reckoning . '
and we rained down on them a shower : and evil was the shower on those who were admonished !
and indeed we have fully explained to mankind , in this quran , every kind of similitude , but most mankind refusebut disbelief .
therefore let not their speech grieve you ; surely we know what they do in secret and what they do openly .
stay up during the night , except a little .
said two men from among those who were godfearing and whom allah had blessed : ‘ go at them by the gate ! for once , you have entered it , you will be victors . put your trust in allah , should you be faithful . ’
we know indeed the grief which their words do cause thee : it is not thee they reject : it is the signs of allah , which the wicked contemn .
whose eyes had been veiled against our quran and who were not able to hear .
say : my lord ! if thou shouldst show me that which they are promised .
and verily , the dwellers of al-hijrdenied the messengers .
so say :  o my lord ! grant thou forgiveness and mercy for thou art the best of those who show mercy ! 
o believers , draw not near to prayer when you are drunken until you know what you are saying , or defiled -- unless you are traversing a way -- until you have washed yourselves ; but if you are sick , or on a journey , or if any of you comes from the privy , or you have touched women , and you can find no water , then have recourse to wholesome dust and wipe your faces and your hands ; god is all-pardoning , all-forgiving .
but allah would not punish them while you , , are among them , and allah would not punish them while they seek forgiveness .
if any do turn away therefrom , verily they will bear a burden on the day of judgment ;
worship god who has rendered the earth as a floor for you and the sky as a dome for you and has sent water down from the sky to produce fruits for your sustenance . do not knowingly set up anything as an equal to god .
except the path of hell ; they will abide therein forever . and that , for allah , iseasy .
indeed , allah has purchased from the believers their lives and their propertiesfor that they will have paradise . they fight in the cause of allah , so they kill and are killed.a true promiseupon him in the torah and the gospel and the qur'an . and who is truer to his covenant than allah ? so rejoice in your transaction which you have contracted . and it is that which is the great attainment .
and the folk of noah aforetime . lo ! they were licentious folk .
neither are you hungry nor naked ,
“ these people , our people , have taken to themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear proof concerning them ? who , then , does greater wrong than he who invents lies and attributes them to god ? ”
and he whose scales are light -- they have lost their soul for wronging our signs .
lot , when he said to his people , ‘ what ! do you commit this indecency while you look on ?
or feel ye secure that he will not return you to thata second time , and send against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your thanklessness , and then ye will not find therein that ye have any avenger against us ?
he has sent down upon thee the book with the truth , confirming what was before it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
he will let loose the sky for you in plenteous rain ,
for we had certainly sent unto them a book , based on knowledge , which we explained in detail , - a guide and a mercy to all who believe .
instead of allah they worship those concerning whom he has revealed no sanction and concerning whom they have no true knowledge . none shall be able to help such evil-doers .
verily the hypocrites would beguile allah , whereas it is he who beguileth them , ; and when they stand up to prayer , they stand up languidly , making a show to the people , and they remember not allah but little .
he it is who made the earth smooth for you , therefore go about in the spacious sides thereof , and eat of his sustenance , and to him is the return after death .
these twoare disputants , who contend about their lord . but they who disbelieve will be fitted out with garments of flames . boiling water will be poured down over their heads
and then shall never come out of it .
“ you were in neglect of this , so we lifted your screen from you , and your vision today is keen . ”
those who believe , and whose descendants follow in belief , we will join their descendants to them . and we will not reduce them of anything of their deeds . every one is pledged for what he has earned .
then , on that day , ye shall surely be asked of the delights .
who is further astray than he who calls upon , other than allah , those who will never answer him till the day of resurrection , who are indeed , heedless of their supplication ?
they said : surely we are sent to a guilty people ,
well , you are those who pleaded for them in the life of this world ; but who will plead for them on the day of resurrection or be their security ?
and those who give what they give , while their hearts quake , knowing that to their lord they will return .
say , ‘ i am not a novelty among the apostles , nor do i know what will be done with me , or with you . i just follow whatever is revealed to me , and i am just a manifest warner . ’
indeed it is allah , who is the greatest sustainer , the strong , the able .
and indeed we seized them with punishment , but they humbled not themselves to their lord , nor did they invokewith submission to him .
have they not seen how we have granted them a safe sanctuary , though all around them people are snatched away ? would they still believe in falsehood , and deny the favour of god ?
and amassedand hoarded .
and who does greater evil that he who forges a lie against allah or belied the truth when it comes to him ! is there not a lodging in gehenna for the unbelievers ?
and worship thy lord until there cometh unto thee the certainty .
indeed , today they are surrendering themselves completely . ”
and when moosa said to his people , “ o my people ! you have wronged yourselves by taking the calf , * therefore turn in repentance to your creator , therefore kill each other ; this is better for you before your creator ” ; he therefore accepted your repentance ; indeed he only is the most acceptor of repentance , the most merciful .
and he taught adam the names of all things ; then he placed them before the angels , and said :  tell me the names of these if ye are right . 
if you disbelieve , then verily , allah is not in need of you , he likes not disbelief for his slaves . and if you are grateful , he is pleased therewith for you . no bearer of burdens shall bear the burden of another . then to your lord is your return , so he will inform you what you used to do . verily , he is the all-knower of that which is inbreasts .
and whosoever hath worked ill of an atom 's weight shall behold it .
good and evil deeds are not equal . repel with that which is most just , and see , the one whom there is enmity between you will be as if he were a loyal guide .
they wish you to become unbelievers as they themselves are . do not establish friendship with them until they have abandoned their homes for the cause of god . if they betray you , seize them and slay them wherever you find them . do not establish friendship with them or seek their help
those in the fire will say to its keepers ,  implore your lord to relieve our torment for one day , 
surely they have done with denying ; soon will come to them the news of what they were laughing at .
have you not regarded that allah drives the clouds , then he composes them , then he piles them up , whereat you see the rain issuing from its midst ? and he sends down hail from the sky , out of the mountains that are in it , and he strikes with it whomever he wishes , and turns it away from whomever he wishes . the brilliance of its lightening almost takes away the sight .
the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women are all alike ; they enjoin evil and forbid good and withhold their hands ; they have forsaken allah , so he has forsaken them ; surely the hypocrites are the transgressors .
o you who believe ! if you helpallah , he will help you and make firm your feet .
and do not cheat the people of their goods . do not act wickedly on the earth , causing corruption .
say , ‘ i have been commanded to worship allah with exclusive faith in him ,
verily those who have split their religion and become sects , thou art not amongst them in aught : their affair is only with allah . then he will declare unto them that which they were wont to do .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than i am . send him with me to support me and back me up . for i fear that they will reject me . 
and the fifth that allah 's wrath be upon her if he is of the truthtellers .
those who disbelieve in the revelations of allah and inmeeting with him , such have no hope of my mercy . for such there is a painful doom .
the beneficent god is too exalted to have a son .
so if they do not accept your challenge , then know that they only follow their desires ; and who is more astray than one who follows his desires away from the guidance of allah ? indeed allah does not guide the unjust .
if ye help him not , still allah helped him when those who disbelieve drove him forth , the second of two ; when they two were in the cave , when he said unto his comrade : grieve not . lo ! allah is with us . then allah caused his peace of reassurance to descend upon him and supported him with hosts ye can not see , and made the word of those who disbelieved the nethermost , while allah 's word it was that became the uppermost . allah is mighty , wise .
or have they taken , besides him , other gods ? say , “ bring your proof . this is a message for those with me , and a message of those before me. ” but most of them do not know the truth , so they turn away .
o thou shrouded in thy mantle ,
or , do they feel secure against the coming of our punishment upon them in the forenoon while they are at play ?
on the day when god resurrects them all , and informs them of what they did . god has kept count of it , but they have forgotten it . god is witness over everything .
he said :  this has been given to me only because of knowledge i possess .  did he not know that allah had destroyed before him generations , men who were stronger than him in might and greater in the amountthey had collected . but the mujrimunwill not be questioned of their sins .
“ allah is indeed my lord , and yours – therefore worship him ; this is the straight path . ”
propound not then for allah similitudes , verily allah knoweth and ye know not .
then when he decided to seize the man who was an enemy to both of them , the man said :  o musa ! is it your intention to kill me as you killed a man yesterday ? your aim is nothing but to become a tyrant in the land , and not to be one of those who do right . 
for they never expected to be called to account ,
who shall inherit the firdaus . they shall dwell therein forever .
their prayer at the house is nothing but whistling and clapping . so taste the punishment because of what you used to defy .
increase through him my strength
that allah may forgive you your sins of the past and the future , and complete his favour on you , and guide you on the straight path ;
from among the jinn and mankind . 
then they cut their affair among them in regard to the scriptures : each band in that which is with them rejoicing .
with goblets and ewers and a cup filled with a drink drawn from a running spring ,
surely we will ease his way unto adversity .
and ismail and idris and zulkifl ; all were of the patient ones ;
he splits the sky into dawn . he has ordained the night for rest and the sun , and the moon for reckoning . such is the ordinance of the almighty , the knowing .
and they hewed houses in the mountains in security .
and those whom you invoke other than allah , they can neither help themselves nor you .
when they come unto you , they say : we believe ; but they came in unbelief and they went out in the same ; and allah knoweth best what they were hiding .
and there are among them illiterates who know not the book but only lies , and they do but conjecture .
prophet , we have made lawful for you your wives whom you have given their dowry , slave girls whom god has given to you as gifts , the daughters of your uncles and aunts , both paternal and maternal , who have migrated with you . the believing woman , who has offered herself to the prophet and whom the prophet may want to marry , will be specially for him , not for other believers . we knew what to make obligatory for them concerning their wives and slave girls so that you would face no hardship . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
 and behold ! i inspired the disciples to have faith in me and mine messenger : they said , 'we have faith , and do thou bear witness that we bow to allah as muslims '  .
so when some hardship reaches man , he prays to us ; then later when we bestow a favour upon him , he says , “ i obtained this only because of some knowledge ” ; in fact it is a test , but most of them do not have any knowledge .
and his accompanying angel said , “ this is the record of your deeds , available with me . ”
there is no worship except for him – he gives life and causes death ; your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he will not visit them with attrition ? indeed your lord is most kind and merciful .
haply i shall do righteousness in that i forsook . ' nay , it is but a word he speaks ; and there ; behind them , is a barrier until the day that they shall be raised up .
he has created man :
do they not know that god knows what they conceal and what they reveal ?
moses addressed his lord , saying ,  lord , these people are sinners  .
did your lord prefer you for sons , andadopt females from among the angels ? indeed , you say a monstrous word !
, tell those of my servants who believe that they should establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided them with , both secretly and openly , before there arrives the day when there will be no bargaining , nor any mutual befriending .
they said : have you come to us that we may serve allah alone and give up what our fathers used to serve ? then bring to us what you threaten us with , if you are of the truthful ones .
faces will be humble before the everlasting and the self-existing god . despair will strike those who are loaded with the burden of injustice .
and young attendants like pearls within their shells , will go round .
no indeed ; but upon that day they shall be veiled from their lord ,
see they not that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , and never wearied with their creation , is able to give life to the dead ? yea , verily he has power over all things .
allah : the everlasting , the sustainer of the whole universe ; there is no god but he . he does neither slumber nor sleep . whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earth is his . who is there that can intercede with him except by his own permission. ? he knows what is before the people and also what is hidden from them . and they can not comprehend anything of his knowledge save whatever he himself pleases to reveal . his kingdom spreads over the heavens and the earth and the guarding of these does not weary him . he alone is the supreme and the exalted .
they seek to hide from men and seek not to hide from allah . he is with them when by night they hold discourse displeasing unto him . allah ever surroundeth what they do .
and keep yourself patientwith those who call upon their lord in the morning and the evening , seeking his countenance . and let not your eyes pass beyond them , desiring adornments of the worldly life , and do not obey one whose heart we have made heedless of our remembrance and who follows his desire and whose affair is everneglect .
o believers , the fast has been made obligatory on you just as it was prescribed for the followers of the prophets before you . it is expected that this will produce piety in you .
he is therefore in the desired serenity .
march forth light and heavy and strive hard with your riches and your lives in the way of allah ; that is the best for you , if ye have knowledge .
verily this community of yours is a single community , and i am your lord ; so worship me .
he said , 'do they hear you when you call ,
god does not like the public uttering of bad language , unless someone was wronged . god is hearing and knowing .
and moses said to them : 'alas ! do not forge a lie against allah lest he destroys you with a punishment . indeed , whosoever forges has failed '
andthose who avoid cardinal sins and indecencies , and forgivewhen they are angry .
o prophet ! why do you banthat which allah has made lawful to you , seeking to please your wives ? and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
“ and fear him who created you and the earlier creations . ”
o ye who believe ! be steadfast witnesses for allah in equity , and let not hatred of any people seduce you that ye deal not justly . deal justly , that is nearer to your duty . observe your duty to allah . lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
the kingdom upon that day shall belong to allah . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good works shall be in gardens of bliss ,
lo ! as for these , their way will be destroyed and all that they are doing is in vain .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and thereafter stand fast thereto , no fear shall come upon them , nor shall they grieve .
why did the faithful men and women not think well of their people when they heard this , and said :  this is a clear lie ? 
therefore , remind and preach . by the grace of allah , you are neither a soothsayer , nor a madman .
be wary of allah and do not humiliate me . ’
honourable and virtuous .
so we shall question those unto whom a message was sent , and we shall question the envoys ,
“ yet i do not claim to be innocent . the soul commands evil , except those on whom my lord has mercy . truly my lord is forgiving and merciful . ”
by the ones who recite the reminder :
“ and they have misled a large number ; andyou increase nothing for the unjust except error . ”
and you will see it with your own eyes .
lay hold of him and chain him ;
with bowls and ewers and a cup from a pure spring
they said : certainly you know that we have no claim on your daughters , and most surely you know what we desire .
“ are these the ones you swore god will not touch with mercy ? ” “ enter the garden ; you have nothing to fear , and you will not grieve . ”
certainly we have destroyed your likes . so is there anyone who will be admonished ?
and when they saw them , they said ,  these men have surely gone astray , 
they have been precluded from hearing it .
 verily , i fear for you the torment of a great day . 
they say : 'our hearts are covered ' but allah has cursed them for their disbelief . little is that they believe .
god is he that created you of weakness , then he appointed after weakness strength , then after strength he appointed weakness and grey hairs ; he creates what he will , and he is the all-knowing , the all-powerful .
for all that is in the heavens and the earth belongs to god ; and god is sufficient as guardian .
if thou couldst but see when they are confronted with the fire ! they will say :  would that we were but sent back ! then would we not reject the signs of our lord , but would be amongst those who believe ! 
on that day man will be informed of what he sent forward , and what he left behind .
 is it that the reminder is sent to him ] alone from among us ? nay , he is an insolent liar ! 
: ‘ this is your reward , and your efforts have been well-appreciated . ’
have you not observed those who dispute regarding god 's revelations , how they have deviated ?
so we brought the believers out of that they were in .
every hinderer of the good , transgressor , disquieter ,
or askest thou them for a wage , and so they are weighed down with debt ?
against him it is written down that whoever takes him for a friend , he shall lead him astray and conduct him to the chastisement of the burning fire .
allah loveth not that evil should be noised abroad in public speech , except where injustice hath been done ; for allah is he who heareth and knoweth all things .
although it is not for you to be concerned if he remained unpurified .
each of them denied the messengers , so my penalty was justified .
and we created not the heaven and the earth and all that is between them without purpose ! that is the consideration of those who disbelieve ! then woe to those who disbelievefrom the fire !
they said :  the good tiding we give you is of truth . do not , therefore , be of those who despair . 
then willhave no power , nor any helper .
we did not create them both but with the truth , but most of them do not know .
and know that your wealth and your children are a test , and that with allah is an immense reward .
your god is the one god . but the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter are steeped in rejection of the truth , and they are given to arrogance .
when you complete your prayer , remember god all the time while standing , sitting , or reclining . when you are safe , say your prayers properly . it is a constant duty of the believers .
originator of the heavens and the earth , he has made your consorts from among you , and made pairs of cattle . he multiplies you in this way . there is no other like him . he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
or have theythe unseen , so they writedown ?
who is he that will lend allah a goodly loan , so that he may multiply it for him , and his shall be a hire honourable ?
and when we said to the angels , 'bow yourselves to adam ' ; so they bowed themselves , save iblis ; he said , , 'shall i bow myself unto one thou hast created of clay ? '
say : 'if men and jinn banded together to produce the like of this koran , they would never produce its like , not though they backed one another . '
if you desire to replace one wife with another , do not take any part of her dower back : even if you have given her a treasure . would you take it by slandering her and with manifest sinfulness ?
every matter , small and great , is on record .
and it is he who feeds me and gives me drink .
is not that one then able to quicken the dead ?
say , ‘ is that better , or the everlasting paradise promised to the godwary , which will be their reward and destination ? ’
and from wheresoever you start forth , turn your face in the direction of al-masjid-al-haram , that is indeed the truth from your lord . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
do they not know that god extends the provision to whomever he wills , and constricts it ? in that are signs for people who believe .
do not be faint of heart in pursuing these people : if you happen to suffer harm they too are suffering just as you are , while you may hope from allah what they can not hope for . allah is all-knowing , all- wise .
fight those people of the book who do not believe in god and the last day , who do not prohibit what god and his apostle have forbidden , nor accept divine law , until all of them pay protective tax in submission .
he said : 'before any food comes to feed either of you , i will give you its interpretation . that which i will tell you has been taught to me by allah . i reject the belief of a nation who do not believe in allah and disbelieve in the everlasting life .
they ask you , , about the bounties . say ,  thebounties is for allah and the messenger .  so fear allah and amend that which is between you and obey allah and his messenger , if you should be believers .
whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is a witness of all things .
“ you are taking vengeance on us only because we have believed in the signs of our lord when they have come to us. ” “ our lord ! pour out patience upon us , and receive our souls in submission . ”
and those who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear , because they will return to their lord ; -
.  were not my verses recited to you and you used to deny them ? 
and say :  all praise be to allah who has neither taken to himself a son , nor has he any partner in his kingdom , nor does he need anyone , out of weakness , to protect him .  so glorify him in a manner worthy of his glory .
he knows the deceptions of the eyes , and what the hearts conceal .
and they say : fire shall not touch us but for a few days . say : have you received a promise from allah , then allah will not fail to perform his promise , or do you speak against allah what you do not know ?
and when it said unto them believe in that which allah hath sent down now , they say : we believe in that which hath been sent down unto us . and they disbelieve in that which is besides that while it is the truth , confirming that which is with them . say thou : wherefore then slew ye allah 's prophets afore , a if ye have been believers ?
and most of them follow naught but an opinion ; verily opinion availeth not against the truth ; verily allah is the knower of that which they do .
hiding from the people because of the evil of the tidings ; “ will he keep her with disgrace , or bury her beneath the earth ? ” ; pay heed ! very evil is the judgement they impose !
verily the garden ! -that shall be his resort .
bethinkest thou not of those who went forth from their habitations , and they were in their thousands , to escape death then allah said unto them : die and thereafter quickened them . verily allah is gracious unto men ; albeit most men give not thanks .
and the olive and the palm ,
if we defer their punishment for a certain time , they will say :  what is keeping it back ?  and yet , the day it comes , they will not be able to avert it ; and what they used to laugh at will encompass them .
and we sent down the book to thee for the express purpose , that thou shouldst make clear to them those things in which they differ , and that it should be a guide and a mercy to those who believe .
or if there had been , of the generations before you , men of a remainder forbidding corruption in the earth -- except a few of those whom we delivered of them ; but the evildoers followed the ease they were given to exult in and became sinners .
and recall what time ye slew a person , then quarrelled among yourselves respecting it , and allah was to bring out that which ye were hiding .
o ye people ! eat of what is on earth , lawful and good ; and do not follow the footsteps of the evil one , for he is to you an avowed enemy .
then he came forth to his people from the sanctuary , and he beckoned unto them . hallow your lord morning and evening .
 o lord , save me and my family from what they do . 
but proclaim the blessings of your lord .
say ,  nothing can befall us , except what god has ordained for us . he is our supreme lord . in god let the faithful put their trust . 
the day when the quaking will cause a violent convulsion ,
whether ye divulge a thing or keep it hidden , lo ! allah is ever knower of all things .
in this there is evidence , yet most of them do not have any faith .
the beneficent
it is satan who frightens his friends . do not be afraid of thembut have fear of me if you truly believe .
whichnone can touch but the purified .
and we sent shuaib to madyan from their community ; he said , “ o my people ! worship allah – you do not have any god except him ; indeed a clear proof has come to you from your lord , so measure and weigh in full and do not give the people their goods diminished , and do not spread turmoil in the earth after it is organised ; this is for your good , if you believe . ”
the penalty on the day of judgment will be doubled to him , and he will dwell therein in ignominy , -
are you secure of those in the heaven that he should not make the earth to swallow you up ? then lo ! it shall be in a state of commotion .
on the day when we call a witness against every nation from their own people , we will call you , , as a witness against them all . we have sent you the book which clarifies all matters . it is a guide , a mercy , and glad news to the muslims .
therein are benefits for you for an appointed term ; and afterward they are brought for sacrifice unto the ancient house .
and by the day as it appears in brightness ;
no vision can grasp him , but his grasp is over all vision : he is above all comprehension , yet is acquainted with all things .
say ,  in all that has been revealed to me , i do not find a ban on anything to eat , except for carrion , flowing blood and pork , all these being unclean or profane , on which the name of someone other than god has been invoked .  but if anyone is forced by necessity , being neither disobedient nor exceeding the limit , then surely your lord is most forgiving and merciful .
and those in the fire will say unto the keepers of hell : supplicate your lord that he may lighten for us a day of the torment .
and i do not think that the hour will ever set in . and even if i am returned to my lord i will surely find a resort better than this . ’
therejected all our signs ; but we seized them with such penaltyfrom one exalted in power , able to carry out his will .
the people of noah impugned before them . so they impugned our servant and said , ‘ a crazy man , ’ and he was reviled .
andthat she was wont to worship instead of allah hindered her , for she came of disbelieving folk .
is it they who would portion out the mercy of your lord ? it is we who portion out between them their livelihood in this world , and we raised some of them above others in ranks , so that some may employ others in their work . but the mercyof your lordis better than thewhich they amass .
say : our lord will gather us together , then will he judge between us with the truth ; and he is the greatest judge , the all-knowing .
the criminals will be known by their marks , and they will be seized by the forelocks and the feet .
and al-muttaqunwill be far removed from it .
andthose of your women who have despaired of menstruation , if you have a doubt , their prescribed time shall be three months , and of those too who have not had their courses ; andthe pregnant women , their prescribed time is that they lay down their burden ; and whoever is careful ofallah he will make easy for him his affair .
forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brothers ' daughters and sisters ' daughters and your mothers that have suckled you and your foster-sisters and mothers of your wives and your step-daughters who are in your guardianship , of your wives to whom you have gone in , but if you have not gone in to them , there is no blame on you , and the wives of your sons who are of your own loins and that you should have two sisters together , except what has already passed ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and , most surely , you are calling them to a straight path .
but if you desire god and his messenger and the last abode , surely god has prepared for those amongst you such as do good a mighty wage .
do they not reflect upon what lies before them and behind them , of the heaven and the earth ? if we will , we can make the earth cave in beneath them , or make pieces of the sky fall down on them . in that is a sign for every devout servant .
indeed , they planned their plot , and their plot was with allah , though their plot was a greatit would never be able to remove the mountainsfrom their places . .
so when our command came , we saved salih and those who believed with him , by mercy from us , andfrom the disgrace of that day . indeed , it is your lord who is the powerful , the exalted in might .
this is the blessed book that we have revealed to you , , that people with understanding may reflect over its verses and those with understanding derive a lesson .
and certainly we gave to dawood excellence from us : o mountains ! sing praises with him , and the birds ; and we made the iron pliant to him ,
indeed the worst beasts in the sight of allah are thosewho are deaf , dumb – who do not have any sense .
and a party of the people of the book say : believe in that which hath been sent down unto those who have believed , at the break of day , and disbelieve at the close thereof , haply they may turn away ;
i seek no livelihood from them , nor do i ask that they should feed me .
she said : verily the kings , when they enter a city , despoil it , and make the most powerful inhabitants thereof the most abased ; so will they do .
i swear by the book that makes things clear :
being proud against it , talking foolishness by night .
those whom they call upon do desiremeans of access to their lord , - even those who are nearest : they hope for his mercy and fear his wrath : for the wrath of thy lord is something to take heed of .
we saved our messengers and those who believed ; we must save the believers .
that is the knower of the sensible and the unseen , the all-mighty , the all-merciful ,
say : he is the beneficent allah , we believe in him and on him do we rely , so you shall come to know who it is that is in clear error .
their accustomed securitythe caravan of winter and summer -
what is the calamity ?
call to mind the other event also , when abraham said ,  my lord , show me how thou bringest the dead back to life ?  he said  have you no faith in this ?  abraham humbly replied ,  i do believe but i ask this to reassure my heart .  allah said ,  well , take four birds and tame them with yourself and thenand place a piece of each of them on each hill . then call them and they will come running to you ; know this for certain that allah is all-powerful , all-wise . 
they left - how many ! - of gardens and springs .
they have no awliya to help them besides allah . there is no way out for those whom allah leads astray . ’
those who believe , and work righteousness , tubais for them and a beautiful place ofreturn .
 if we had a reminder as had the men of old .
thamud deniedin their rebellious pride ,
do they not know that allah outspreads and withholds his provision to whosoever he will ? surely , there are signs in this for a believing nation .
why did they not think over the message ? or has something come to them which had not come to their fathers ?
andthose who came after them , saying ,  our lord , forgive us and our brothers who preceded us in faith and put not in our heartsresentment toward those who have believed . our lord , indeed you are kind and merciful . 
save thy single-minded slaves among them .
it is he who made the stars for you , so that you may be guided by them in the darkness of land and sea . we have certainly elaborated the signs for a people who have knowledge .
then we gave you a chance against them , and strengthened you with wealth and children , and increased your numbers :
have we not created you from a fluiddespicable ? -
for those whom allah lets go astray , there is no guide ; and he will leave them in their transgression to stumble blindly .
o you who believe , be custodians of justicewitnesses for god , even though against yourselves or your parents or your relatives . whether a man be rich or poor , god is his greater well-wisher than you . so follow not the behests of lust lest you swerve from justice ; and if you prevaricate or avoid , god is cognisant of all that you do .
he asked : 'messengers , what is your errand '
and of the bedouins there are some who look upon what they spendas a fine and watch for calamities for you , on them be the calamity of evil . and allah is all-hearer , all-knower .
they will cry out in hell and say : “ our lord , let us out so that we may act righteously , different from what we did before. ” : “ did we not grant you an age long enough for anyone to take heed if he had wanted to take heed ? besides , there came a warner to you . so have a taste of the torment now . none may come to the help of the wrong-doers . ”
and turned the land upside down , and rained down stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind , nor is there any blame on the lame , nor is there blame on the sick ; and whoever obeys allah and his apostle , he will admit him into gardens with streams running in them , and whoever refuses to comply , he will punish him with a painful punishment .
it was he who created you ; and some of you are those who deny this truth , and some who believe . god sees everything you do .
and take recourse in patience and prayer , and it is indeed hard except for the humble
does not man see that we have created him from the small seed ? then lo ! he is an open disputant .
they are surprised that a warner should come to them from among themselves . they say ,  this is a magician , a great liar .
the day when he will gather them , as though they had lingered but an hour of the day and they will recognize one another . lost are those who belied the meeting with their lord and were not guided .
so glorify the name of your lord , the supreme .
there he is obeyed and held trustworthy .
even if we had sent the wind and causedto turn yellow and to fade away , they would still have remained in disbelief .
and recall what time ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city a place of security , and provide the people thereof with fruits , - such of them as will believe in allah and the last day . allah said : and whosoever will disbelieve , him also shall give enjoyment for a while ; thereafter i shall drive him to the torment of the fire , - an ill abode !
if you turn away , i have conveyed to you what i was sent to you with ; and my lord will replace you with another people , and you will not cause him any harm . my lord is guardian over all things . ”
that is allah , your lord . there is no god except he , the creator of all things . therefore , worship him . he is the guardian of all things .
blessed is he who sent down the criterion to his servant that he may be a warner to all the nations .
so did they not travel in the land in order to see what sort of fate befell those before them ? their strength and the signs they left behind in the earth , exceeded them – so allah seized them on account of their sins , and they had no one to save them from allah .
between them is a barrier which they do not transgress :
hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the scripture hath been given , how they believe in idols and false deities , and how they say of thosewho disbelieve :  these are more rightly guided than those who believe  ?
and verily messengerswere mocked before thee , but long i bore with those who disbelieved . at length i seized them , and howwas my punishment !
when he comes to know something of our messages he makes fun of them : for them is shameful punishment .
none but a few youths of moses ' people accepted him , fearing that pharaoh and their own chiefs would persecute them . indeed pharaoh was mighty in the land , he was among those who exceed all limits .
at length , when they reach the , their hearing , their sight , and their skins will bear witness against them , as totheir deeds .
that is because thy lord would never destroy the cities unjustly , while their inhabitants were heedless .
indeed , those of you who turned back on the day the two armies met , it was satan who caused them to slip because of somethey had earned . but allah has already forgiven them . indeed , allah is forgiving and forbearing .
indeed , there was a party of my servants who said , 'our lord , we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy upon us , and you are the best of the merciful . '
and did they not see that allah eases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it for whomever he wills ? indeed in this are signs for people who believe .
it is god who has sent down the book with the truth and the scales of justice . what will make you realize that the hour might well have drawn near ?
when youare travelling in the land , you will not be blamed for shortening your prayers , if you fear the disbelievers may harm you . they are your avowed enemies .
and we led the children of isra'il across the sea . then they came upon a people cleaving to the idols they had . t'hev said : musa ! make for us a god even as they have gods . he said : verily ye are a people given to ignorance .
corruptness hath appeared on land and sea because of that which men 's hands have earned , so that he may make them taste a part of that which they have worked , in order that haply they may turn .
we answered the prayer of noah who had prayed to us before and saved him and his followers from the great disaster .
o ye who believe ! ye have charge of your own souls . he who erreth can not injure you if ye are rightly guided . unto allah ye will all return ; and then he will inform you of what ye used to do .
and surely it will be a cause of regret for the unbelievers .
then he made his progeny of an extract , of water held in light estimation .
excepting those who may repent and believe and work righteously ; these shall enter the garden and shall not be wronged at all * chapter : 19
they say : “ if you are truthful , tell us when will this promisebe fulfilled ? ”
and when some hardship strikes man , he prays to his lord , inclined only towards him – then when allah grants him a favour from himself , he forgets why he had prayed to him earlier , and sets up equals to allah in order to mislead from allah ’ s way ; proclaim , “ revel in your disbelief for some days ; you are indeed of the people of the fire . ”
, had the gain been close at hand , and easy the journey , they would surely have followed you ; but hard was the journey and long the going . even then they swear by god :  if we had the strength we would surely have gone out with you .  they are only ruining themselves , for god is aware they lie .
and those who believe inallah and his messengers , they are the siddiqun , and the martyrs with their lord , they shall have their reward and their light . but those who disbelieveand deny our ayat , they shall be the dwellers of the blazing fire .
those who disbelieve from among the people of the scriptureand among al-mushrikun , were not going to leaveuntil there came to them clear evidence .
then he shall leave it a plain , level .
whose season is not limited , norforbidden ,
be firm in devotion ; give zakat , and bow with those who bow .
lord of both the easts , and lord of both the wests !
and those who believe and do righteous works , -- those shall be the fellows of the garden , as abiders therein .
and it is forbidden for any township which we have destroyed , that they may return .
and therein made the grains to grow
the day they actually hear the blast , will be the day of rising of the dead .
one day we shall seize you with a mighty onslaught : we will indeedexact retribution !
those who devour usury will not stand up on the day of judgement , except like the one whom an evil jinn has deranged by his touch ; that is because they said , “ trade is also like usury ! ” ; whereas allah has made trading lawful and forbidden usury ; for one to whom the guidance has come from his lord , and he refrained therefrom , is lawful what he has taken in the past ; and his affair is with allah ; and whoever continues earning it henceforth , is of the people of fire ; they will remain in it for ages .
when you recite the koran , we place between you and those who do not believe in the everlasting life an obstructing barrier .
say : 'are you awaiting for aught to come to us but one of the two rewards most fair ? we are awaiting in your case too , for god to visit you with chastisement . from him , or at our hands ; so await ; we are awaiting with you . '
there was but a single blast and suddenly they became silent and still .
and we rained upon them a rain , and evil was the rain of those who were warned .
so o dear prophet , by oath of your lord , they will not be muslims until they appoint you a judge for the disputes between them – and then whatever you have decided , they should not find opposition to it within their hearts , and they must accept it wholeheartedly .
all of this ; but , for the proud there is an ill return .
that you bring it back , if you are truthful ?
we made subservient to solomon the swift wind that blew on his command to the land in which we had sent blessings . we have the knowledge of all things .
and wherefore did you not say when you entered your garden : it is as allah has pleased , there is no power save in allah ? if you consider me to be inferior to you in wealth and children ,
and that : ask forgiveness of your lord , then repent toward him , he will let you enjoy a goodly enjoyment until a term appointed and will vouchsafe unto every owner of grace his grace . and if ye turn away , verily i fear for you the torment of a great day .
on the day when it cometh no soul will speak except by his permission ; some among them will be wretched , glad .
when their fellowman nooh said to them , “ do you not fear ? ”
yet when the truth came to them 'from ourselves , they said , 'why has he not been given the like ' of that moses was given ? ' but they , did they not disbelieve also in what moses was given aforetime ? they said , ' a pair of sorceries mutually supporting each other . ' they said , 'we disbelieve both . '
but we are a fully accounted army . 
and if he is from the deniers , the astray , –
and certainly we have made the quran easy for remembrance , but is there anyone who will mind ?
o ye who believe ! take not my enemies and yours as friends , - offering themlove , even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you , and havedriven out the prophet and yourselves , because ye believe in allah your lord ! if ye have come out to strive in my way and to seek my good pleasure , , holding secret converse of lovewith them : for i know full well all that ye conceal and all that ye reveal . and any of you that does this has strayed from the straight path .
the freewill offerings are for the poor and needy , those who work to collect them , those whose hearts are brought together , the ransoming of slaves , debtors , in god 's way , and the traveller ; so god ordains ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
so on that day no power shall they have over each other , for profit or harm : and we shall say to the wrong-doers ,  taste ye the penalty of the fire , - the which ye were wont to deny ! 
and it will be said : “ we will forget you today as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . the fire shall now be your abode , and you shall have none to come to your aid .
not equal are the inmates of the fire and the inhabitants of paradise . it is the inhabitants of paradise who are the successful ones .
containing upright precepts .
so after this , in what matter will they believe ?
do they possess the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the great bestower ?
were it not for the fear that all people would become one in disbelief , we would have made for the disbelievers in the beneficent god ceilings out of silver and ladders by which they would climb up ,
this is indeed the true account , for sure . there is no god but allah , and indeed allah is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and we delivered him and lot to the land which we had blessed for the worlds .
to us they are among the chosen , the outstanding .
and of the people of the book is he who , if thou trust him with a hundredweight , will restore it thee ; and of them is he who , if thou trust him with one pound , will not restore it thee , unless ever thou standest over him . that , because they say , 'there is no way over us as to the common people . ' they speak falsehood against god and that wittingly .
the likeness of those who take other patrons than allah is as the likeness of the spider who taketh unto herself a house . and verily the frailest of all houses is the spider 's house - if they but knew !
and you love wealth with immense love .
and there are many angels in the heavens , whose intercession will avail nothing except after allah has given leave for whom he wills and pleases .
he would have lingered in its belly till the day they are resurrected .
and whoever is averse to the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint a devil upon him , who stays with him .
abiding there forever , they shall find in it all that they desire . this is a binding promise which your lord has made .
tell them : 'indeed those who invent lies against allah will never prosper .
when joseph said to his father : 'father , i saw eleven planets , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them prostrating themselves before me '
this is the tradition of god which existed before , and you will never find any change in his tradition .
they will live in it for ever , and will find no saviour or helper .
whereat he smiled , amused at its words , and he said , ‘ my lord ! inspire me to give thanks for your blessing with which you have blessed me and my parents , and that i may do righteous deeds which please you , and admit me , by your mercy , among your righteous servants . ’
therefore turn away from them for some time .
“ so taste my punishment , and my warnings ! ”
and we have not revealed to you the book , , except for you to make clear to them that wherein they have differed and as guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
when he reached the place where the sun rises , he found it rising on a people for whom we had not provided any shield against it .
perhaps you consume yourself that they are not believers .
 as to those who disbelieve , i will punish them with a severe torment in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers . 
but we are nearer to him than ye , and yet see not , -
he used to command his people to offer prayer and give charity , and was liked by his lord .
he said : 'moses , have you come to drive us from our land with your sorcery ?
and to every one we have appointed heirs of what parents and near relatives leave ; and as to those with whom your rights hands have ratified agreements , give them their portion ; surely allah is a witness over all things .
until , when they reach it , their hearing and their eyes and their skins will testify against them of what they used to do .
nor are you going to serve him whom i serve :
and by this secure land ,
and from idle talk turn away
if ye reject , truly allah hath no need of you ; but he liketh not ingratitude from his servants : if ye are grateful , he is pleased with you . no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of another . in the end , to your lord is your return , when he will tell you the truth of all that ye did . for he knoweth well all that is inhearts .
or say they : he hath invented it ? nay , but it is the truth from thy lord , that thou mayst warn a folk to whom no warner came before thee , that haply they may walk aright .
and verily we gave the children of israel the scripture and the command and the prophethood , and provided them with good things and favoured them abovepeoples ;
do you have a manifest authority ?
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , whereas he has given you superiority above the entire world ? ” .
and downcast will be faces before the living , the self- subsisting , and disappointed will be he who beareth a wrong .
and when a daughter is announced to one of them his face becomes black and he is full of wrath .
and we have fastened every man 's deeds to his neck , and on the day of resurrection , we shall bring out for him a book which he will find wide open .
said ,  indeed , i am the servant of allah . he has given me the scripture and made me a prophet .
and who created the pairs , all of them , and appointed for you ships and cattle such as you ride ,
it was said ,  enter paradise .  he said ,  i wish my people could know
my protector is god who sent down the book , for it is he who protects the righteous .
and those who do not have the means to get married must keep chaste till allah provides them the resources by his munificence ; and the bondwomen in your possession who , in order to earn something , seek a letter of freedom from you – then write it for them if you consider some goodness in them ; and help them in their cause with allah ’ s wealth which he has bestowed upon you ; and do not force your bondwomen into the dirty profession , while they wish to save themselves , in order to earn some riches of the worldly life ; and if one forces them then indeed allah , upon their remaining compelled , is oft forgiving , most merciful .
if they do not answer you , then know it has been revealed with the knowledge of god , and that there is no god but he .  will you now submit ? 
indeed your lord is the all-mighty , the all-merciful .
at this moses threw down his staff , and lo , it became a live serpent .
will you then not understand ?
god is the supreme truth and whatever they worship instead of him is falsehood . god is most exalted and most great .
but does he not know that when the contents of the graves are scattered
say : 'shall i take for my guardian anyone other than allah - the originator of the heavens and earth ; he who feeds and himself is not fed ? ' say : 'surely i have been commanded to be the first among those who submitand not to be one of those who associate others with allah in his divinity . '
they said , “ swear by god to one another that we will attack him and his family by night , and then tell his guardian , 'we did not witness the murder of his family , and we are being truthful . ' “
when he had furnished them with provisions , he placed the king 's drinking cup in his own brother 's baggage . then someone shouted ,  people of the caravan , you are thieves ! 
and to samoodtheir brother salih . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; clear proof indeed has come to you from your lord ; this isallah 's she-camel for you -- a sign , therefore leave her alone to pasture on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with any harm , otherwise painful chastisement will overtake you .
your lord brought you forth from your home in a righteous cause while a party among the believers were much averse to it .
i said to them : “ ask forgiveness from your lord ; surely he is most forgiving .
then , belike ye are , if ye turn to cause corruption in the earth away , and to sever your kinship .
the ones whom the angels take in death , good and pure ; will say ,  peace be upon you . enter paradise for what you used to do . 
when the heaven is sundered .
so glorify the praise of your lord , and be among those who bow down .
if you fear a breach between the two , appoint an arbiter from his family and an arbiter from her family . if they wish to reconcile , god will bring them together . god is knowledgeable , expert .
wait ; we too are waiting '
say : 'people of the book ! do not go beyond bounds in your religion at the cost of truth , and do not follow the caprices of the people who fell into error before , and caused others to go astray , and strayed far away from the right path .
if you do good openly or do it in secret or pardon an evil then surely allah is pardoning , powerful .
say to those who disbelieve : 'you shall be overcome and gathered into gehenna , an evil cradling '
say : naught befalleth us save that which allah hath decreed for us . he is our protecting friend . in allah let believers put their trust !
then look how was the end of those who were warned -
can one who knows that whatever has been sent down to you from your lord is the truth , be equal to one who is blind ? it is only those who are endowed with insight who pay heed ;
and one of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and what he has spread forth in both of them of living beings ; and when he pleases he is all-powerful to gather them together .
said :  if you took another god apart from me i will have you incarcerated . 
when moses prayed for rain , we told him to strike the rock with his staff . thereupon twelve fountains gushed out of the rock and each tribe knew their drinking place . the lord told them ,  eat and drink from god 's bounties and do not abuse the earth with corruption . 
 if you were to obey a human being like yourselves , then verily ! you indeed would be losers .
and a throng from the latecomers .
they shall not hear in it anything vain ; they shall hear only what is good ; and they shall have their provision in it , morning and evening .
if we had willed , we would have raised up in every city a warner .
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is all for allah . but if they cease , then lo ! allah is seer of what they do .
they see itto be far off ,
but they disbelieve in it , but soon they shall know !
have the people been amazed that we revealedto a man from among them , ,  warn mankind and give good tidings to those who believe that they will have aprecedence of honor with their lord  ? the disbelievers say ,  indeed , this is an obvious magician . 
then , allah enables , whomsoever he wills , to repent . allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
and that the final return is to your lord ,
and they have therefrom other benefits and drinks . will they not then give thanks ?
when the sun and the moon are brought together ,
and when they passed by them , they would exchange derisive glances .
that is because god is the reality , and what they invoke besides him is vanity , and because god is the sublime , the grand .
sayto those who disbelieve :  you will be defeated and gathered together to hell , and worst indeed is that place to rest . 
and when the sent angels came to the house of lut .
and marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves and maid-servants . if they be poor , allah will enrich them of his bounty . allah is of ample means , aware .
therefore , when ye meet the unbelievers , smite at their necks ; at length , when ye have thoroughly subdued them , bind a bond firmly : thereaftereither generosity or ransom : until the war lays down its burdens . thus : but if it had been allah 's will , he could certainly have exacted retribution from them ; butin order to test you , some with others . but those who are slain in the way of allah , - he will never let their deeds be lost .
who has fed them , from hunger and made them safe , from fear .
and if we send a windbrought up by the previous rain ] , and they seeturn yellow , behold , they then after their being glad , would become unthankfuldisbelievers .
when they took joseph with them , they agreed to throw him into the well . we revealed to joseph thatin the future at a time when they would not recognize him , he would remind them of all this .
he said ,  my lord , prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me . and if you do not avert from me their plan , i might incline toward them andbe of the ignorant . 
while he ] was in the highest part of the horizon ,
then , by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is the truth , just as it is the truth that you can speak .
the faithless say , ‘ what ! when we and our fathers have become dust shall we be raised ?
then moses threw his staff , and behold , it began swallowing their trickery .
and fields , and palm-trees whose fruits are delicious ?
and by the night as it recedes ,
if you find their rejection hard to bear , then if you can , seek a tunnel into the earth , or a stairway into the heaven , and bring them a sign . had god willed , he could have gathered them to guidance . so do not be of the ignorant .
and we revealed to musa , saying : cast your rod ; then lo ! it devoured the lies they told .
but the penalty seized them . verily in this is a sign : but most of them do not believe .
i ask no recompense of you for it . my reward is due from none but the lord of all the worlds .
and among them are those who look at you . but can you guide the blind , even though they do not see ?
bethink men that they shall be left alone because they say : we believe ; and that they shall not be tempted ?
it is a day whereon no soul shall own aught of power for any soul ; and the command on that day will be allah 's .
but as for those whose book of records will be given behind their backs ,
verily ! when the water rose beyond its limitsflood ] , we carried youin the floating ] .
the human being is in loss .
to god belong the most beautiful names , so call him by them , and disregard those who blaspheme his names . they will be repaid for what they used to do .
believers , do not accept your fathers and brothers as your guardians if they prefer disbelief to faith , lest you be unjust .
and relieve you of your burden
when our command came , and water gushed forth in torrents , we said to noah ,  take into the ark a pair from every species , and your own family -- except those on whom the sentence has already been passed , and all the true believers .  but only a few believed along with him .
when the great calamity comes ,
we have created them and have given them strength . had we wanted , we could have replaced them with another people like them .
she said , “ alas for me . shall i give birth , when i am an old woman , and this , my husband , is an old man ? this is truly a strange thing . ”
do they not then consider what is before them and what is behind them of the heaven and the earth ? if we please we will make them disappear in the land or bring down upon them a portion from the heaven ; most surely there is a sign in this for every servant turning .
those who reject our revelations will certainly be punished for their evil deeds .
and say :  my lord ! make my landing a blessed landing , for you are the best of those who can cause people to land in safety . 
and if thou wert to ask them : who causeth water to come down from the sky , and therewith reviveth the earth after its death ? they verily would say : allah . say : praise be to allah ! but most of them have no sense .
lord of power and wisdom . so he acquired poise and balance ,
except the chosen creatures of god .
in a guarded tablet .
when the souls are coupled ,
and remember when you were few , deemed weak in the land , fearing lest people might carry you off by force , but he sheltered you and strengthened you with his aid and gave you of the good things that you may give thanks .
by oath of those that are sent , one after the other . .
god intends to lighten your burden , for the human being was created weak .
but only he that brings to allah a sound heart will . 
so they shall not be able to make a bequest , nor shall they return to their families .
i am naught but a plain warner .
and say , ‘ ‘ my lord ! land me with a blessed landing , for you are the best of those who bring ashore . ’ ’ ’
it is not right for a prophet to keep captives unless he has battled strenuously in the land . you desire the gain of this world , while god desires for you the hereafter -- god is mighty and wise .
but only one who comes to allah with a sound heart . 
but what is the matter with the unbelievers , that they strain their glances continuously towards them ,
say , “ whether you spend willingly or unwillingly , it will not be accepted from you . you are evil people . ”
upon the day when god 's enemies are mustered to the fire , duly disposed ,
but he did not venture to scale the difficult steep .
and we ordained therein for them :  life for life , eye for eye , nose for nose , ear for ear , tooth for tooth , and wounds equal for equal .  but if anyone remits the retaliation by way of charity , it shall be for him an expiation . and whosoever does not judge by that which allah has revealed , such are the zalimun .
and the sky , how it has been raised ?
enter the gates of hell to remain in it . evil is theabode of the arrogant . ’
if god were to punish the people for what they have earned , he would not leave a single living creature on its surface . but he defers them until a stated time . then , when their time has arrived—god is observant of his creatures .
prophet , tell your wives , daughters , and the wives of the believers to cover their bosoms and breasts . this will make them distinguishable from others and protect them from being annoyed . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
who will inherit paradise ; they shall live there for ever .
but no , by thy lord ! they will not believe till they make thee the judge regarding the disagreement between them , then they shall find in themselves no impediment touching thy verdict , but shall surrender in full submission .
when they returned to their father , they told him ,  father , they will refuse us one further measure of grain . send our brother with us so that we can obtain that measure . we shall watch over him carefully  .
surely those who do not hope in our meeting and are pleased with this world 's life and are content with it , and those who are heedless of our communications :
that issues from between the loins and the ribs .
even if they were to see lumps of the sky falling down , they would say , “ a mass of clouds . ”
their parable is that of satan when he says to man : “ disbelieve , ” but when he disbelieves , he says : “ i am quit of you . verily i fear allah , the lord of the universe . ”
thereupon moses returned to his people , indignant and grieved . he said , ‘ o my people ! did your lord not give you a true promise ? did the periodseem too long to you ? or did you desire that your lord ’ s wrath should descend on you and so you failed your tryst with me ? ’
yet there are some who dispute about god without having any knowledge and they follow every rebellious devil ,
so fear god as much as you can , and listen and obey , and spend in charity for your own good . he who is saved from his own avarice will be successful .
he said , “ behold this * – the one whom you have honoured above me – if you give me respite till the day of resurrection , i will surely crush his descendants , except a few . ”
until , when our command came , and the oven boiled , we said , 'embark in it two of every kind , and thy family -- except for him against whom the word has already been spoken and whosoever believes . ' and there believed not with him except a few .
no knowledge thereof have they , nor had their fathers . odious is the word that cometh out of their mouths ; they say not but a lie .
after him we sent messengers to their nation . they brought them clear signs , but they were not of those to believe because they had belied it previously . sowe seal the hearts of the evildoers .
we indeed offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused it and were afraid of it – and man accepted it ; indeed he is one who puts himself into hardship , is extremely unwise .
allah has promised those of you who have faith and do righteous deeds that he will surely make them successors in the earth , just as he made those who were before them successors , and he will surely establish for them their religion which he has approved for them , and that he will surely change their state to security after their fear , while they worship me , not ascribing any partners to me . whoever is ungrateful after that—it is they who are the transgressors .
he spake : lo ! i am the slave of allah . he hath given me the scripture and hath appointed me a prophet ,
and were such a qur ’ an to come that would cause the mountains to move , or the earth to split asunder , or the dead to speak , even then these disbelievers would not believe ; in fact , all matters are only at allah ’ s discretion ; so have not the muslims despaired in that , had allah willed , he would have guided all mankind ? disasters shall continue to strike the disbelievers on account of their deeds , or descend near their homes until allah ’ s promise comes ; indeed allah does not break the promise .
in a near land , and they , after being vanquished , shall overcome ,
: if ye do good , ye do good for your own souls , and if ye do evil , it is for them . so , when the time for the secondcameto ravage you , and to enter the temple even as they entered it the first time , and to lay waste all that they conquered with an utter wasting .
the kingdom on that day shall rightly belong to the beneficent allah , and a hard day shall it be for the unbelievers .
faces on that day will be radiant .
the only place of refuge will be with god .
those who die and leave wives behind should bequeath to them a year 's maintenance without causing them to leave their homes ; but if they leave , no blame shall be attached to you in what they do with themselves kindly . allah is mighty and wise .
and with them are those of modest gaze , companions .
when he arrived at the spring of midian , he found there a crowd of people watering their flocks , and he found apart from them two women holding their flocks back . he asked the women :  what is it that troubles you ?  they said :  we can not water our flocks until the shepherds take their flocks away , and our father is a very old man . 
and become scattered dust ,
o my people , i ask no recompense of you for it : my reward is with him who created me . will you not , therefore , understand ?
and he felt from them apprehension . they said ,  fear not ,  and gave him good tidings of a learned boy .
he has kept for you the same path of religion which he commanded nooh , and what we divinely reveal to you , and what we had commanded to ibrahim and moosa and eisa that , “ keep the religion proper , and do not create divisions in it ” ; the polytheists find the matter what you call them to as intolerable ; allah chooses for his proximity whomever he wills , and guides towards himself whoever inclines .
and certainly apostles before you were mocked at , but that which they mocked at encompassed the scoffers among them .
, do not move your tongue too quickly to recite the quran .
and if there were a qur'an whereby the mountains could be moved or whereby the earth could be traversed or whereby the dead could be spoken to , it would be in vain . aye ! the affair belongeth to allah entirely . have not then those who believe yet known that had allah willed , he would have guided all mankind ! and a rattling adversity ceaseth not to befall those who disbelieve for that which they have wrought or to alight nigh unto their habitation . until allah 's promise cometh ; verily allah faileth not the tryst .
before him is hell , and he will get putrid liquid to drink .
like the people of noah , 'ad and thamud , and those that came after them . god does not want to be unjust to his creatures .
say , “ shall i inform you of worse than that for retribution from god ? he whom god has cursed , and with whom he became angry ; and he turned some of them into apes , and swine , and idol worshipers . these are in a worse position , and further away from the right way . ”
everyone shall know all his deeds , both the earlier and the later .
whoever works any act of righteousness and has faith , - his endeavour will not be rejected : we shall record it in his favour .
your companion is neither astray nor being misled .
that they might eat of its fruits . it was not their hands that made them . will they not , then , give thanks ?
their works shall be annulled in this world and in the everlasting life , and there shall be none to help them .
and lo ! those who disbelieve would fain disconcert thee with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say : lo ! he is indeed mad ;
listeners to falsehoods , eaters of illicit earnings . if they come to you , judge between them , or turn away from them . if you turn away from them , they will not harm you in the least . but if you judge , judge between them equitably . god loves the equitable .
we shall remove all rancor from their hearts , and as brethren they shall recline on couches face to face .
and if your lord had willed , he could have made mankind one community ; but they will not cease to differ .
 the king of mankind ,
o dear prophet , did you not see your lord , how he spread the shade ? and if he willed , he could have made it still ; then we made the sun a proof upon it .
 that they may witness the benefitsfor them , and celebrate the name of allah , through the days appointed , over the cattle which he has provided for them : then eat ye thereof and feed the distressed ones in want .
that we may produce therewith corn and vegetations ,
gardens and grapes .
and they bar others from believing and themselves keep away . but they ruin no one but themselves , though they fail to realize this .
and those who are patient , seeking the countenance of their lord , and establish prayer and spend from what we have provided for them secretly and publicly and prevent evil with good - those will have the good consequence ofhome -
turning his side to lead astray from god 's way ; for him is degradation in this world ; and on the resurrection day we shall let him taste the chastisement of the burning :
have they not seen how we have made the night for them to rest in and the day to see ? surely , there are signs in this for the nation who believe .
you pass by their ruins morning
we know well how their talk grieveth thee , though in truth they deny not theebut evil-doers flout the revelations of allah .
and peace upon the messengers .
if we will , we can drown them—with no screaming to be heard from them , nor will they be saved .
whom the angels take while they were still harming themselves ' then they will offer submission , saying : 'we have done no evil ' no , surely allah knows what you have done .
and when he attained the age of , running with him , he said : o my son ! verily i have seen in a dream that i am slaughtering thee ; so look , what considerest thou ? he said : o my father ! do that which thou art commanded ; thou shalt find me , allah willing , of the patients .
god has given you wives from among yourselves , and given you children and grandchildren from your wives , and provided wholesome things for you . will they then believe in falsehood and deny god 's favours ?
it is nothing but a reminder unto all beings ,
and fields and stately mansions ,
there is atime for every nation : when their time comes , they shall not defer it by a single hour nor shall they advance it .
everything in the heavens and the earth praises god . he is the almighty , the wise .
he wishes to turn towards you in mercy , but those who follow their own passions want you to drift far away from the right path .
extol his glory at night , and at the setting of the stars .
that i will most certainly fill hell with you and with those among them who follow you , all .
the village arabs are more obstinate in disbelief and hypocrisy , and impervious to ordinances revealed to his apostle by god ; yet god is aware of everything and is wise .
this is allah 's guidance , he guides thereby whom he pleases of his servants ; and if they had set up others , certainly what they did would have become ineffectual for them .
a section of the people of the book say :  believe in the morning what is revealed to the believers , but reject it at the end of the day ; perchance they mayturn back ;
the parable of those who spend their wealth seeking allah ’ s pleasure and to confirm themselves , is that of a garden on a hillside : the downpour strikes it , whereupon it brings forth its fruit twofold ; and if it is not a downpour that strikes it , then a shower , and allah watches what you do .
so that you walk in its spacious paths . '
the day their excuse will not benefit the wrongdoers , and they will have the curse , and they will have the worst home .
and when they see a sign , they turn away and say , “ just a customary magic ! ”
perish he , how he decided !
then you will see it with the eye of certainty .
so fear allah and obey me .
their condition may be described in a parable : a man kindled a fire and when it illuminated all around him , allah took away the light from their eyes and left them in utter darkness , where they could not see anything .
on the day when the earth shall be cleft , from off them , hastening forth . that will be a gathering , quite easy for us .
they will not harm you except a little hurt . and if they fight against you , they will turn their backs . then they will not be victorious .
and marium , the daughter of imran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our inspiration and she accepted the truth of the words of her lord and his books , and she was of , the obedient ones .
have you not seen those who have been forbidden to have secret counsels violate this prohibition and resume their secret counsels for sinful and hostile purposes and to disobey the messenger ? when they come to you , they greet you with a greeting with which even god has not greeted you and say to themselves ,  why has god not punished us for what we say ?  the heat of hell is a sufficient torment for them . this is the most terrible fate .
then have patience . lo ! the promise of allah is true . and ask forgiveness of thy sin , and hymn the praise of thy lord at fall of night and in the early hours .
whoso obeyeth the messenger hath obeyed allah , and whoso turneth away : we have not sent thee as a warder over them .
establish prayer at the decline of the sununtil the darkness of the night andthe qur'an of dawn . indeed , the recitation of dawn is ever witnessed .
and comes your lord , and angels row on row ,
no ! i swear by the twilight
when we cancel a messageor throw it into oblivion , we replace it with one better or one similar . do you not know that god has power over all things ?
and yet they have taken gods , other than allah , so that they might helped !
or do they think that we hear not their secrets and their private counsel ? and our messengersare by them , to record .
the unbelievers say : 'shall we direct you to a man who will tell you that when you have been utterly torn into pieces you will be raised in a new creation ? '
when you met the pagans ' army , god made them appear fewer in your eyes and you appear fewer in their eyes so that his miracle of granting youvictory could easily be fulfilled . to god do all things return .
and he gave you of all that you asked for , and if you count the blessings of allah , never will you be able to count them . verily ! man is indeed an extreme wrong-doer , - a disbeliever .
surely you can not guide whom you love , but allah guides whom he pleases , and he knows best the followers of the right way .
say thou : the knowledge is only with allah , and but a warner manifest .
do they have any feet to walk with ? do they have any hands to grasp with ? do they have any eyes to see with ? do they have any ears to hear with ? say , ‘ invoke your partnersand try out your stratagems against me without granting me any respite .
and of the dwellers of the desert are those who take what they spend to be a fine , and they waitcalamities to you ; on themthe evil calamity ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
when they will be dragged on their faces into the fire and will be told ,  feel the touch of hell  .
they replied ,  we found our fathers worshipping them  .
say ,  obey allah and the messenger .  but if they turn away - then indeed , allah does not like the disbelievers .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who were mightier in power than they , and they traversed the cities ! no place of refuge could they find .
do you think that you will be leftwhile allah has not yet made evident those among you who striveand do not take other than allah , his messenger and the believers as intimates ? and allah is acquainted with what you do .
and as to ad , they were destroyed by a roaring , violent blast .
have they not then journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of those before them ? they were morethan these and greater in strength and in fortifications in the land , but what they earned did not avail them .
this is an enlightenment for mankind , and a guidance and mercy for the people of faith .
and we blessed him and is-haq ; and of their offspring are some well-doers and some who wrong themselves manifestly .
o you who believe ! be not like those who annoyed musa , but allah cleared him of that which they alleged , and he was honourable before allah .
they said ,  our lord , we have wronged ourselves , and if you do not forgive us and have mercy upon us , we will surely be among the losers . 
and none but the guilty led us astray ;
nun . by the pen and that which they write ,
allah is he who raised the heavens without any pillars that you see , and he is firm in power and he made the sun and the moon subservient ; each one pursues its course to an appointed time ; he regulates the affair , making clear the signs that you may be certain of meeting your lord .
theis indeed the message , for thee and for thy people ; and soon shall yebe brought to account .
they also say , 'what ails this messenger that he eats food , and goes in the markets ? why has an angel not been sent down to him , to be a warner with him ?
are your unbelieversany better than they ? or have you been granted any immunity in the scriptures ?
alif lam ra.a book which we have revealed to you that you may bring forth men , by their lord 's permission from utter darkness into light -- to the way of the mighty , the praised one ,
say , “ that is a great tidings . ”
he said , “ you throw. ” and suddenly , their ropes and sticks appeared to him , because of their magic , to be crawling swiftly .
so , , we have only made qur'an easy in the arabic language that you may give good tidings thereby to the righteous and warn thereby a hostile people .
and they were not divided until after the knowledge came unto them , through rivalry among themselves ; and had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from thy lord for an appointed term , it surely had been judged between them . and those who were made to inherit the scripture after them are verily in hopeless doubt concerning it .
further , they will enter the fire of hell .
that is how we have sent down thisas a code of clear judgement . but if you follow their caprices , now that you have been given knowledge , you will have no friend or protector against god .
then we hold it in hand for a brief grasp .
say , ‘ my lord , forgive and have mercy , and you are the best of the merciful . ’
if thou couldst see when they are set before the fire and say : oh , would that we might return ! then would we not deny the revelations of our lord but we would be of the believers !
the recompense of such is that on them is the curse of allah and of the angels and of men combined .
it has seven gates and each gate is assigned for a certain group of people .
and musa chose out of his people seventy men for our appointment ; so when the earthquake overtook them , he said : my lord ! if thou hadst pleased , thou hadst destroyed them before and myself ; wilt thou destroy us for what the fools among us have done ? it is naught but thy trial , thou makest err with it whom thou pleasest and guidest whom thou pleasest : thou art our guardian , therefore forgive us and have mercy on us , and thou art the best of the forgivers .
i swear by the day of resurrection ;
and the birthpangs surprised her by the trunk of the palm-tree . she said , 'would i had died ere this , and become a thing forgotten ! '
verily your lord is immensely mighty , ever compassionate .
and if entrance had been forced against them from those quarters , and then they had been asked to apostatise , they would have done so , and but tarried about it briefly .
 we should have invented a lie against allah if we returned to your religion , after allah has rescued us from it . and it is not for us to return to it unless allah , our lord , should will . our lord comprehends all things in his knowledge . in allahwe put our trust . our lord ! judge between us and our people in truth , for you are the best of those who give judgment . 
to allah belongs the unseen in the heavens and in the earth ; to him the matter , in its entirety , shall be returned . worship him , and put your trust in him . your lord is not inattentive of the things you do .
that the day when allah will call unto them , and say :  where are those whom you imagined to be my associates ? 
to every community is a direction towards which it turns . therefore , race towards goodness . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god is capable of everything .
o you who have faith ! shall i show you a deal that will deliver you from a painful punishment ?
if you call them to the right path , they will not hear you . you find them looking towards you , but they do not see you .
that they rejected faith ; that they uttered against mary a grave false charge ;
allah says to them , “ join the groups of jinns and mankind who have entered hell before you ” ; when a group enters , it curses the other ; until when they have all gone in , the latter groups will say regarding the former , “ our lord ! it is these who led us astray , so give them double the punishment of the fire ” ; he will say , “ for each one is double – but you do not know . ”
he said :  o my people ! i am to you a warner , clear and open :
and what shall teach thee what is the night of power ?
say , “ o people ! the truth * has come to you from your lord ; so whoever came to guidance , has come to guidance for his own benefit ; and whoever strayed , has strayed for his own harm ; and i am not a trustee over you . ”
muslim men and muslim women , believing men and believing women , obedient men and obedient women , truthful men and truthful women , patient men and patient women , humble men and humble women , charitable men and charitable women , fasting men and fasting women , men who guard their chastity and women who guard , men who remember god frequently and women who remember—god has prepared for them a pardon , and an immense reward .
and if they deny you , - already were messengers denied before you . and to allah are returnedmatters .
have you not heard of him who argued with abraham about his lord because god had bestowed the kingdom upon him ? abraham said ,  my lord is the one who gives life and brings death .  he answered ,  igive life and bring death !  abraham said ,  god brings up the sun from the east , so bring it up yourself from the west .  then the disbeliever was confounded . god does not guide the wrongdoers .
performer of what he desires .
moses said to them :  cast what you have to cast . 
“ indeed we fear from our lord a day which is extremely bitter , most severe . ”
and who turns away from the religion of abraham but such as debase their souls with folly ? him we chose and rendered pure in this world : and he will be in the hereafter in the ranks of the righteous .
then adam received some wordsfrom his lord and he accepted his repentance . he is the forgiving one , the merciful .
and even so their associate-gods have made fair seeming unto many of the associaters the slaying of their offspring , so that they may cause them to perish and that they may confound unto them their religion . and had allah so willed , they would not have done it . wherefore let thou alone them and that which they fabricate .
and we have kept it guarded from every outcast devil .
do they not think they will be raisedagain
it was not in play that we created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them .
when the truth came to them from us , they said ,  this is plain sorcery . 
she said :  woe betide me ! will i give birth when i am old and this my husband be aged ? this is indeed surprising ! 
it does not become those who associate others with allah in his divinity to visit and tend allah 's mosques while they bear witness of unbelief against themselves . all their works have gone to waste . they shall abide in the fire .
, exercise patience with no complaints .
and naught was their prayer at the house but whistling and hand-clapping . taste then the torment for ye were to disbelieve .
when you are greeted with a salute , greet with a better one than it , or return it ; indeed allah takes account of all things .
they said , “ if you do not refrain , o noah , you will be stoned . ”
 o my lord ! deliver me and my family from such things as they do ! 
and furnished him with extensive means ,
and he is allahin the heavens and on the earth , he knows what you conceal and what you reveal , and he knows what you earn .
o you who believe , remember the favours of god to you when an army came against you and we sent a wind against them and forces that you did not see . but god sees all that you do .
it is he who forms you in the wombshowever he wishes . there is no god except him , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
therefore , let those who follow the gospel judge according to what god has revealed in it . those who do not judge by what god has sent down are rebellious .
 'be ye not arrogant against me , but come to me in submission . ' 
whatever mercy allah accords to people , none can withhold ; and whatever he withholds , no other will be able to release after him . he is most mighty , most wise .
said he , 'indeed i did it then , being one of those that stray ;
when he saw the fire , he said to his family ,  wait here for i can see a fire . perhaps i shall bring you a burning torch or find a way to some fire  .
surely those who say , 'our lord is god ' and then go straight , no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
and made the day for livelihood
indeed , the most compassionate lord will soon create enduring love for those who believe and do righteous works .
and we gave them of our mercy , and assigned to them a high and true renown .
then when they beheld it as an overpeering cloud tending toward their valleys they said : yonder is an overpeering cloud bringing us rain . nay it is that which ye sought to be hastened : a wind wherein is a torment afflictive .
and we revealed to moses and his brother , 'take you , for your people , in egypt certain houses ; and make your houses a direction for men to pray to ; and perform the prayer ; and do thou give good tidings to the believers . '
wait thou then ; verily they also are waiting .
he said :  i intend to wed one of these my daughters to thee , on condition that thou serve me for eight years ; but if thou complete ten years , it will befrom thee . but i intend not to place thee under a difficulty : thou wilt find me , indeed , if allah wills , one of the righteous . 
“ to whom will come a punishment that will disgrace , and upon whom descends the punishment that never ends . ”
deep green .
except the path of hell , to abide in it for ever , and this is easy to allah .
so we gave the understanding thereof unto sulaiman ; and unto each we vouchsafed judgment and knowledge . and we so subjected the mountains that they shall hallow us along with daud , and also the birds ; and we were the doers .
 call on your lord ,  they said ,  to tell us the colour of the cow .   god says ,  answered moses ,  a fawn coloured cow , rich yellow , well pleasing to the eye . 
and stop them . they are to be questioned . ”
say “ o jews ! if you assume that you are allah ’ s friends , others are not , then wish for death if you are truthful ! ”
o prophet ! indeed we have made lawful to you your wives whom you have given their dowries , and those whom your right hand owns , of those whom allah gave you as spoils of war , and the daughters of your paternal uncle , and the daughters of your paternal aunts , and the daughters of your maternal uncle , and the daughters of your maternal aunts who migrated with you , and a faithful woman if she offers herself to the prophet and the prophet desires to take her in marriagethe faithful ; we know what we have made lawful for them with respect to their wives and those whom their right hands own , so that there may be no blame on you ) , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
hast thou not observed those who were forbidden conspiracy and afterward returned to that which they had been forbidden , andconspire together for crime and wrongdoing and disobedience toward the messenger ? and when they come unto thee they greet thee with a greeting wherewith allah greeteth thee not , and say within themselves : why should allah punish us for what we say ? hell will suffice them ; they will feel the heat thereof - a hapless journey 's end !
“ and we angels do not come down except by the command of your lord ; to him only belongs all that is ahead of us and all that is behind us and all that is between them ; and your lord is not forgetful . ”
have you not considered himwho disputed with ibrahim about his lord , because allah had given him the kingdom ? when ibrahim said : my lord is he who gives life and causes to die , he said : i give life and cause death . ibrahim said : so surely allah causes the sun to rise from the east , then make it rise from the west ; thus he who disbelieved was confounded ; and allah does not guide aright the unjust people .
his are the sailing ships on the sealike landmarks .
we dispersed them in groups over the earth , some righteous , some otherwise ; and we tried them with good things and bad , that they may haply turn back .
consider the fire that you strike .
and goblets set forth
we gave unto moses the scripture , and we appointed it a guidance for the children of israel , saying : choose no guardian beside me .
for you therein will be fruits in plenty whereof ye will eat .
so shall we make later generations to follow them .
who spread evil in the land with no reform . 
exalt with the praise of your lord and ask forgiveness from him . for indeed , he is the turner .
that . and if one has retaliated to no greater extent than the injury he received , and is again set upon inordinately , allah will help him : for allah is one that blots outand forgives .
'by allah ' they said , 'this is but your old illusion '
thenwe save our messengers and those who believe ! thus it is incumbent upon us to save the believers .
they say : allah has taken a son ! glory be to him : he is the self-sufficient : his is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth ; you have no authority for this ; do you say against allah what you do not know ?
the day when maulancannot avail maulanin aught , and no help can they receive ,
andishmael , and idris , and dhu ' l-kifl . all were of the steadfast .
and do not be one of those who deny the signs of god , or you will be among the losers .
allah is creator of all things , and he watches over all things .
and the heaven , how it is raised ?
that is the paradise which we shall give the cautious worshipers to inherit .
do not stand in it , ever . a mosque founded upon piety from the first day is worthier of your standing in it . in it are men who love to be purified . god loves those who purify themselves .
` put him in the chest ; then cast him into the river . the river will wash him to shore , where an enemy of mine and an enemy of his will pick him up . and i have bestowed upon you love from me , so that you may be reared before my eye .
these people of ours have taken deities other than him . why do they not produce clear evidence about them ? who is more wicked than the man who invents a falsehood against god ?
there shall be no sinunto those who believe and do good works for what they may have eaten . so be mindful of your duty , and believe , and do good works ; and again : be mindful of your duty , and believe ; and once again : be mindful of your duty , and do right . allah loveth the good .
and the mountains like tufts of carded wool .
when he came to his lord with a pure heart ,
they say :  what ! shall we indeed be returned toformer state ?
and if we opened upon them a door of the heaven , and they passed the day mounting thereto .
and he found thee wandering , and he gave thee guidance .
most surely he who has made the quran binding on you will bring you back to the destination . say : my lord knows best him who has brought the guidance and him who is in manifest error .
and it was said : o earth ! swallow thy water and , o sky ! be cleared of clouds ! and the water was made to subside . and the commandment was fulfilled . and itcame to rest uponal-judi and it was said : a far removal for wrongdoing folk !
and do not set up any deity with allah . surely i am a clear warner to you from him .
he was born and died in peace and will be brought back to life again in peace .
say : 'show me those you have joined to him as associates . no indeed ; rather he is god , the all-mighty , the all-wise . '
many of the people of the book are eager to turn you into unbelievers after your faith , out of their inner envy , after the truth had become manifest to them . yet excuseand forbear until allah issues his edict . indeed allah has power over all things .
the day when you will turn around to retreat , there will be none to protect you from allah . he whom allah lets go astray , none will be able to show him the right way .
and others who have not yet joined , and he will give them wisdom . before this they had been in plain error . god is majestic and all-wise .
and when it is said unto them : come ! that the apostle of allah may ask forgiveness for you , they twist their heads , and thou beholdest them retire , while they are stiff-necked .
just aswe sent the messenger to you from among you , who recites to you our revelations ; who purifies your lives ; who instructs you in the book and in wisdom and teaches you those things that you did not know .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend your fathers and brothers if they prefer faithlessness to faith . those of you who befriend them—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
and the brothers sold him for an improper price , a limited number of coins ; and they had no interest in him .
then we ransomed him with a tremendous victim .
it is he who sends down clear verses upon his chosen bondman , in order to take you out from the realms of darkness towards light ; and indeed allah is most compassionate , most merciful upon you .
andsaid to his servants ,  put their merchandise into their saddlebags so they might recognize it when they have gone back to their people that perhaps they willreturn . 
who , when reminded of the revelations of their lord , do not try to ignore them as though deaf and blind . rather , they try to understand and think about them .
and his people came rushing towards him , and they had been long in the habit of practising abominations . he said :  o my people ! here are my daughters : they are purer for you ! now fear allah , and cover me not with shame about my guests ! is there not among you a single right-minded man ? 
 on the day when he will call you , and you will answer with his praises and imagine you did not tarry but a while . 
it spares nothing ; it leaves nothing intact ;
when you are greeted with a greeting , greet in return with what is better than it , orreturn it equally . certainly , allah is ever a careful account taker of all things .
this abode of the hereafter – we make it for those who do not wish greatness in the land nor turmoil ; and the hereafter is only for the pious .
we have made the heaven a well-secured canopy ; yet still they turn away from our signs .
and let not those who covetously withhold of the gifts which allah hath given them of his grace , think that it is good for them : nay , it will be the worse for them : soon shall the things which they covetously withheld be tied to their necks like a twisted collar , on the day of judgment . to allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do .
so you see those in whose hearts is disease hastening intothem , saying ,  we are afraid a misfortune may strike us .  but perhaps allah will bring conquest or a decision from him , and they will become , over what they have been concealing within themselves , regretful .
when you were running away and did not look back at anyone , while the messenger was calling to you from behind , he paid you back with one sorrow after another , so that you might not grieve for what you lost , nor for what befell you . god is aware of what you do .
every soul will experience the agony of death and to me you will all return .
“ i deliver to you the messages of my lord , and i advise you , and i know from god what you do not know . ”
'and we understand not whether ill is intended to those on earth , or whether their lordintends to guide them to right conduct .
for them will be the home of peace with their lord . and he will be their protecting friend because of what they used to do .
surely it is he who originates , and brings again ,
and plead not on behalf ofwho deceive themselves . lo ! allah loveth not one who is treacherous and sinful .
“ and do not touch her with evil intentions for the punishment of the great day will seize you . ”
and when it is said unto them : come ! the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you ! they avert their faces and thou seest them turning away , disdainful .
if they turn away , tell them ,  i have warned every one of you equally . i do not know when the torment which you have to suffer will take place .
allah would make the burden light for you , for man was created weak .
and the night that falls ,
until when the way is opened up for gog and magog and they press from every elevated place ,
accordingly we forgave him that , and he has a near place in our presence and a fair resort .
god has promised the righteously striving believers to appoint them as his deputies on earth , as he had appointed those who lived before . he will make the religion that he has chosen for them to stand supreme . he will replace their fear with peace and security so that they will worship god alone and consider no one equal to him . whoever becomes an unbeliever after this will be a sinful person .
they ask ,  when it will be the day of judgment ? 
say :  ye shall not be questioned as to our sins , nor shall we be questioned as to what ye do . 
the satisfaction of worldly desires through women , and children , and heaped-up treasures of gold and silver , and pedigreed horses , and cattle and lands is attractive to people . all this is the provision of the worldly life ; but the most excellent abode is with god .
and turn to your lord with all your love .
had we , before sending the quran , given them a book to which they now refer as an authority ?
and if not for a word that preceded from your lord , punishment would have been an obligation , anda specified term .
we have seen your face turned towards the heaven . so we will turn you towards a direction that will satisfy you . so turn your face towards the sacred mosque . and wherever you may be , turn your faces towards it . those who were given the book know that it is the truth from their lord ; and god is not unaware of what they do .
they returned with the favors and the bounties of god untouched by evil and followed by the pleasure of god . god 's favor is great .
but will you shall not , unless god wills , the lord of all being .
woe to the defrauders ,
it is only our mercyand enables enjoyment of life for a while .
and when they passed by them , they winked at one another .
in the nearer land , and they , after their defeat , will be victorious .
and it does not behoove a believer to kill a believer except by mistake , and whoever kills a believer by mistake , he should free a believing slave , and blood-money should be paid to his people unless they remit it as alms ; but if he be from a tribe hostile to you and he is a believer , the freeing of a believing slave , and if he is from a tribe between whom and you there is a convenant , the blood-money should be paid to his people along with the freeing of a believing slave ; but he who can not findshould fast for two months successively : a penance from allah , and allah is knowing , wise .
except as a mercy from us and provision for a time .
indeed you will taste the painful punishment ,
yet have they taken , besides him , gods that can create nothing but are themselves created ; that have no control of hurt or good to themselves ; nor can they control death nor life nor resurrection .
they wish that you would soften , so they would soften .
nay ! surely it is an admonishment .
alif-lam-mim-sad .
on the day when every soul will come pleading for itself , and every soul will be repaid what it did , and they will not be wronged .
did they not observe that we have created a refuge in the sacred land , and people around them are snatched away ? so do they believe in falsehood and are ungrateful for the favours of allah ?
but his lord chose him for his own and made him one of the righteous .
the king ordered his men to bring joseph before him . he wanted to grant him a high office . the king said to joseph ,  from now on you will be an honored and trusted person among us  .
then after that will come seven hard years which will devour all that ye have prepared for them , save a little of that which ye have stored .
would that you knewwhat the inevitable is !
and if not that allah had decreed for them evacuation , he would have punished them inworld , and for them in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
then we made you heirs in the land after them , to see how ye would behave !
they said : o noah ! thou hast disputed with us and multiplied disputation with us ; now bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest us , if thou art of the truthful .
andsee , for they too shall see .
and most surely ours is the hereafter and the former .
and verily to shew them that wherewith we threaten them we are surely able .
from the things he created , allah has given you a covering shade , and he has made for you refuges in the mountains . he has given you garments to protect you from the heat , and garments to protect you from your own violence . as such it is that he perfects his favors upon you , in order that you submit .
indeed we have tested them just as we tested the people of the garden when they vowed they would gather its fruit at dawn ,
and fruits and herbage :
o thou wrapped up in thy raiment !
he looked down and sawin the midst of hell .
if you avoid the major sins which you are forbidden , we will remove from you your lesser sins and admit you to a noble entrance .
and horses , and mules , and donkeys so that you may ride them , and for adornment ; and he will create what you do not know * .
so we cursed them because of them constantly breaking their covenant , and hardened their hearts ; they shift the words of allah from their places , and have forgotten a large portion of the advices that were given to them ; and you will constantly learn of deceits from them , except a few ; so forgive them and excuse them ; indeed allah loves the virtuous .
fear god , and obey me .
and i call the reprehensive soul to witness :
lo ! it is those who disbelieve in the hereafter who name the angels with the names of females .
hast thou not regarded him who disputed with abraham , concerning his lord , that god had given him the kingship ? when abraham said , 'my lord is he who gives life , and makes to die , ' he said , ' i give life , and make to die . ' said abraham , 'god brings the sun from the east ; so bring thou it from the west . ' then the unbeliever was confounded . god guides not the people of the evildoers .
there shall be none to avert it ;
or he mingleth them , males and females , and he maketh barren whom he will . lo ! he is knower , powerful .
and place me among the inheritors of the garden of pleasure .
so fear allah and obey me .
if the debtor is in straitened circumstances , then grant him respite till a time of ease . if you were to write it off as an act of charity , that would be better for you , if only you knew .
and lo ! thy lord , he is indeed the mighty , the merciful .
and verily it is an admonition unto the god-fearing .
and when the girl buried alive shall be asked :
and it is only for us to deliver a clear message '
and by the night when it departs .
and they say : be jews or christians , then ye will be rightly guided . say : nay , butthe religion of abraham , the upright , and he was not of the idolaters .
for every nation we have appointed riteswhich they observe ; so let them not dispute with you concerning your religion , and invite to your lord . indeed , you are on a straight guidance .
 o my lord ,  said he ,  give me respite till the day the dead are raised . 
then leave them alone to plunge and play until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised ,
such is the seizing of thy lord , when he seizes the cities that are evildoing ; surely his seizing is painful , terrible .
or is it that they were unaware of their messenger and were therefore repelled by him for he was a stranger to them ?
andthat bear heavy weight of water ;
he knows the unseen and he does not allow anyone to know his secrets except those of his messengers whom he chooses .
and in the heaven lies your sustenance , and the promise you are given .
we sent aforetime our messengers with clear signs and sent down with them the book and the balance , that men may stand forth in justice ; and we sent down iron , in which ismighty war , as well as many benefits for mankind , that allah may test who it is that will help , unseen , him and his messengers : for allah is full of strength , exalted in might .
concerning the sinners ,
:  both of you throwinto hell , every stubborn disbeliever .
surely , he is ardent in his love of wealth .
even if we take you away , we shall take vengeance upon them ,
but when they saw our might their belief did not benefit them ! it is the way of allah that has passed concerning his worshipers . there , the unbelievers shall be lost .
who guard their privates ,
and the heavens shall be opened as if there were doors ,
the promise of truth has drawn near . the eyes of those who disbelieved will stare in horror : “ woe to us . we were oblivious to this . in fact , we were wrongdoers . ”
plucking the people away , as though they were trunks of uprooted palm-trees .
but his lord exalted him , and included him among his righteous servants .
those vie in good works , outracing to them .
have they not seen the heavens and the earth in front and behind them . had we wanted , we could have caused the earth to swallow them up or made a part of the sky fall upon them . in this there is evidencefor every repenting person .
he said : the lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them , if you would be sure .
and appointed them to be leaders guiding by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , and to perform the prayer , and to pay the alms , and us they served .
these people say .
so prostrate yourselves before god and worship him .
and their spending was not stopped being accepted , except because they disbelieved in allah and his noble messenger , and they come to prayer with heavy hearts , and they do not spend except unwillingly .
and shall have made them virgins ,
then , is it to be expected of you , if ye were put in authority , that ye will do mischief in the land , and break your ties of kith and kin ?
and created the jinn from a fusion of fire .
and we did not send before you except men , towards whom we sent divine revelations – so o people , ask the people of knowledge if you do not know .
what ! they dare say that , “ he has fabricated it ” ? in fact it is the truth from your lord , in order that you warn a nation towards whom no herald of warning came before you , in the hope of their attaining guidance .
and before them we indeed tried the people of firaun , and an honourable noble messenger came to them .
he will admit them by a gate that is pleasing to them , and surely , allah is the knower , the clement .
in that there is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
so made them as maidens .
theysaid :  we have been sent to a people who are mujrimun .
and grant me an honourable mention in later generations ;
marvel ye then at this statement ,
by the witness and the witnessed ,
it is not for any soul that it should believe save with allah 's will , and he layeth the abomination upon those who reflect not .
and the jinn did he create of smokeless fire .
all that is in the heavens and the earth extols the glory of allah . he is the most mighty , the most wise .
allah chooseth from the angels messengers and also from mankind ; verily allah is hearing , beholding .
he has enumerated them and counted them acounting .
they will never wish for death because of what they have done ! god knows best about the unjust people .
we told him ,  take a handful of straw . strike your wife with it to fulfill your oath .  we found him to be patient . what an excellent servant he was . he was certainly most repenting .
he said , ‘ this is the pathstraight to me .
allah ! there is no god but he ! in allah , therefore , let the believers put their trust .
o you who believe ! do not enter the houses of the prophet unless permission is given to you for a meal , not waiting for its cooking being finished -- but when you are invited , enter , and when you have taken the food , then disperse -- not seeking to listen to talk ; surely this gives the prophet trouble , but he forbears from you , and allah does not forbear from the truth and when you ask of them any goods , ask of them from behind a curtain ; this is purer for your hearts andtheir hearts ; and it does not behove you that you should give trouble to the apostle of allah , nor that you should marry his wives after him ever ; surely this is grievous in the sight of allah .
tell them :  o men , it 's my duty to warn you clearly . 
high above ?
the jews and the christians said , “ we are the sons of allah and his beloved ones ” ; say , “ why does he then punish you for your sins ? in fact you are human beings , part of his creation ; he forgives whomever he wills , and punishes whomever he wills ; and for allah only is the kingship of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them – and towards him is the return . ”
so moses said to his people :  remember the favours of god when he saved you from the people of pharaoh who afflicted you with oppression , slaying your sons but keeping alive your women , which was a great trial from your lord . 
the hypocrites will call to the believers ,  were we not with you ?  they will say ,  yes , but you afflicted yourselves and awaitedand doubted , and wishful thinking deluded you until there came the command of allah . and the deceiver deceived you concerning allah .
i have sought refuge with my lord and your lord lest you stone me .
in the past noah 's people , and the people of rass and thamud gave the lie ,
but he who is given his ledger from behind his back
for those who spend for the cause of god ,
save the family of lot . them we shall deliver every one ,
now , when trouble touches man , he cries to us : but when we bestow a favour upon him as from ourselves , he says ,  this has been given to me because of a certain knowledge !  nay , but this is but a trial , but most of them understand not !
you will not be able to treat women with equal fairness , no matter how much you desire it . but do not be so biased as to leave another suspended . if you make amends , and act righteously—god is forgiving and merciful .
on that day we shall gather a crowd from every nation of those who belied our verses , so they are gathered .
let them be ungrateful to what we have granted them . let them enjoy themselves , but they will soon know .
say , ‘ indeed i stand on a manifest proof from my lord and you have denied it . what you seek to hasten is not up to me . judgement belongs only to allah ; he expounds the truth and he is the best of judges . ’
they await just one scream , which will overcome them while they are involved in worldly disputes .
which , then , of the benefits of your lord will ye twain belie ?
certainly we gave moses nine manifest signs . so ask the children of israel . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , ‘ o moses , indeed i think you are bewitched . ’
then of the two prisoners , the one who had been set free , now remembered , after the lapse of a long period , what joseph had said . he said :  i will tell you the interpretation of this dream ; just send me . 
say : 'to whom belongs what is in the heavens and in the earth ? ' say : 'it is god 's . he has prescribed for himself mercy . he will surely gather you to the resurrection day , of which is no doubt . those who have lost their souls , they do not believe .
say :  tell me , if allah took away your hearing and your sight , and sealed up your hearts , who is there - an ilahother than allah who could restore them to you ?  see how variously we explain the ayat , yet they turn aside .
should allah touch you with affliction , there is none to remove it but he ; and should he touch you with good , he has the power to do everything .
that is because authority belongs to god , the true . he is best in rewarding , and best in requiting .
who has createdproportionately ,
through god 's bounty and favour ; god is all knowing , and wise .
so all the praises and thanks are to allah , the lord of the heavens and the lord of the earth , and the lord of the 'alamin .
and ad and pharaoh , the brothers of lot ,
surely you do not make the dead to hear , and you do not make the deaf to hear the call when they go back retreating .
, tell them ,  everyone is waiting . wait and you shall know very soon who will be the followers of the right path with the right guidance . 
the quran is certainly a reminder for the pious ones .
and abraham , when he said to his people , ‘ worship allah and be wary of him . that is better for you , should you know .
throw down your staff .  and when he saw it move as though it were a serpent , he turned his back and fled , and did not look back .  o moses ,  said the voice ,  come forward and have no fear ; you are quite safe .
and when we said to you : surely your lord encompasses men ; and we did not make the vision which we showed you but a trial for men and the cursed tree in the quran as well ; and we cause them to fear , but it only adds to their great inordinacy .
god has sealed their hearts and their ears , and over their eyes there is a covering . they will have a terrible punishment .
and with them wide-eyed maidens restraining their glances
he does propound to you a similitude from your own : do ye have partners among those whom your right hands possess , to share as equals in the wealth we have bestowed on you ? do ye fear them as ye fear each other ? thus do we explain the signs in detail to a people that understand .
of its occurrence , there is no denial .
they will be in gardens , honored .
then let them do away with their untidiness , fulfill their vows , and circle around the ancient house .
indeed those who are with your lord are not conceited towards worshipping him , and they proclaim his purity and it is to him they prostrate .
o prophet ! why do you forbidthat which allah has made lawful for you ; you seek to please your wives ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and exalted is the majesty of our lord , he has taken neither a wife nor a son .
a sending down from the merciful , the compassionate .
is it notthat every time they took a covenant a party of them threw it away ? but , , most of them do not believe .
but those who break the covenant of allah , after having plighted their word thereto , and cut asunder those things which allah has commanded to be joined , and work mischief in the land ; - on them is the curse ; for them is the terrible home !
this was our argument that we gave to abraham against his people . we raise in rank whomever we wish . indeed your lord is all-wise , all-knowing .
'by god , ' they said , 'you know well that we came not to work corruption in the land . we are not robbers . '
with whatmy lord hath pardoned me and made me of the honoured ones !
do not turn your cheek away disdainfully from the people , and do not walk exultantly on the earth . indeed allah does not like any swaggering braggart .
it will be said to him , “ surely yes , why not ? * my signs did come to you , so you denied them and you were haughty and you were a disbeliever . ”
fir'aunsaid :  bring it forth then , if you are of the truthful ! 
and indeed we have illustrated all kinds of examples in this qur ’ an for mankind ; and indeed if you bring a sign to them , the disbelievers will say , “ you are upon nothing but falsehood . ”
does not man see that we have created him from nutfah . yet behold ! heas an open opponent .
so we delivered him and his family , except his wife ; she was one of those that tarried .
'ayn , seen , qaf .
for those on the right ,
he said , ‘ i will not let him go with you until you give me apledge by allah that you will surely bring him back to me , unless you are made to perish. ’ when they had given him theirpledge , he said , ‘ allah is witness over what we say . ’
and a messenger who conveys to you god 's clear messages , so that he might lead those , who believe and do good deeds , out of darkness into light . god will admit those who believe in him and do good deeds into gardens with rivers flowing through them , where they will remain forever . god has indeed made excellent provision for them .
and we guided them on the straight path .
he is not grudging of the unseen .
and there is for you in legal retributionlife , o youof understanding , that you may become righteous .
and that within the breasts is obtained ,
whosoever has done an atom 's weight of good shall see it ,
verily the rising by night ! it is most curbing and most conducive to right speech .
or did we bring them a book aforetime to which they hold ?
and who is more wicked than he who , when reminded of the verses of his lord turns away from them ? we take revenge on the sinners .
allah has indeed bestowed a great favour upon the muslims , in that he sent to them a noble messengerfrom among them , who recites to them his verses , and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom ; and before it , they were definitely in open error .
a messengerfrom god , reciting to them parts of the purified ,
they said , ‘ what shall be its requital if yoube lying ? ’
and that day will other faces be despondent ,
they said :  o moses ! whether wilt thou that thou throwor that we be the first to throw ? 
those who reject faith say :  why is not the qur'an revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen thy heart thereby , and we have rehearsed it to thee in slow , well-arranged stages , gradually .
indeed your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning the matters in which they used to differ .
and as to those who disbelieved and rejected our communications and the meeting of the hereafter , these shall be brought over to the chastisement .
but if it be that his shirt has been torn from behind , then she has lied , and he is one of the truthful . '
 and speak to him mildly , perhaps he may accept admonition or fear allah . 
and as one inviting to allah by his permission , and as a light-giving torch .
but they belied him . therefore we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and we made them caliphs , and we drowned those who belied our verses . see what was the end of those who were warned !
say : 'my lord outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will of his servants ; and whatever thing you shall expend , he will replace it . he is the best of providers . '
christ , son of mary , was no more than a messenger . many messengers passed away before him . his mother was a virtuous woman ; and they both ate food . see how we make the signs clear to them ! see how they turn away !
the which we placed in a place of rest , firmly fixed ,
the people of the pharaoh picked him upthat he would become their enemy and a source of their sorrow . the pharaoh , haman , and their army were sinful people .
if good comes your way they are vexed , but if calamity befalls you , they say :  we had taken precautions in advance ;  and pleased , turn away .
people , it is you who are in need of allah . he is the rich , the praised .
but they revolted against the commandment of their lord , so the rumbling overtook them while they saw .
and is himself witness to it ,
the day when nothing will avail , neither wealth nor offspring ,
then , when the trumpet is sounded ;
they were commanded only to serve god with all-exclusive faith in him , to be upright , and to fulfil their devotional obligations , and to give zakat ; for this is the even way .
they will be waited upon by immortal youths , like pearls hidden in their shells .
establish worship at the going down of the sun until the dark of night , andthe qur'an at dawn . lo ! the qur'an at dawn is ever witnessed .
say ,  intercession is entirely in the hands of god . he controls the heavens and the earth ; you will all return to him . 
it is you we worship , and upon you we call for help .
o believers , take not for your intimates outside yourselves such men spare nothing to ruin you ; they yearn for you to suffer hatred has already shown itself of their mouths , and what their breasts conceal is yet greater . now we have made clear to you the signs , if you understand .
looking toward their lord ;
it is allah who holds the heavens and the earth lest they vanish . should they vanish , none would hold them after him . he is the clement , the forgiving .
he said , “ do not rebuke me for forgetting , and do not make my course difficult for me . ”
verily , in this is a sign : but most of them do not believe .
and we admitted him into our mercy . indeed , he was one of the righteous .
then the household of fir'aunpicked him up , that he might become for them an enemy and agrief . verily ! fir'aun , haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the perspicuous book .
and ask them – did any of the noble messengers we sent before you , appoint any other gods except the most gracious , whom they used to worship ?
and who is better in speech than someone who calls to god , and acts with integrity , and says , “ i am of those who submit ” ?
but when he reached it , he was called , saying : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is round about it ! and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds !
indeed towards your lord only is the return .
the leaders of the unbelievers among his people said :  ah ! we see thou art an imbecile !  and  we think thou art a liar ! 
and the frequented house .
indeed the pious are in gardens and peace .
but when he came to them with our signs , behold they ridiculed them .
and you will see the angels surrounding the thronefrom all round , glorifying the praises of their lord . and theywill be judged with truth , and it will be said . all the praises and thanks be to allah , the lord of the 'alamin .
they said ,  abraham , was it you who did this to our deities ? 
consequently when they rebelled against the command to refrain , we said to them , “ be apes , despised ! ”
praise is due to allah , who has created the heavens and the earth and made darkness and light . yet the unbelievers makeequal with their lord .
they swear by allah that they are part of you whereas they are certainly not part of you . they are merely a people who dread you .
andwhen your lord called musa :  go to the people who are zalimun ,
say : 'if mankind and jinn combined together to produce the like of this koran , they would never be able to produce one like it , not even if they were to help one another '
who do not pay the zakat , and who deny the hereafter .
know that your worldly possessions and your children are just a temptation , and that god has greater rewards with him .
yet you see those in whose hearts is a sickness rushing to them , saying , ‘ we fear lest a turn of fortune should visit us. ’ maybe allah will bring about a victory , or a command from him , and then they will be regretful for what they kept secret in their hearts ,
guide us to the straight way
those who had split up their qur'an into pieces .
and they feed , for the love of him , the poor , and the orphan , and the captive .
and in ` a-ad also was a lesson , when we sent against them the barren wind .
allah has promised to those of you who believe and do good that he will most certainly make them rulers in the earth as he made rulers those before them , and that he will most certainly establish for them their religion which he has chosen for them , and that he will most certainly , after their fear , give them security in exchange ; they shall serve me , not associating aught with me ; and whoever is ungrateful after this , these it is who are the . transgressors .
from it we created you , and into it we will return you , and from it we will bring you out another time .
so they both proceeded : until , when they were in the boat , he scuttled it . said moses :  hast thou scuttled it in order to drown those in it ? truly a strange thing hast thou done ! 
did we will , we would make it bitter ; so why are you not thankful ?
we shall also answer you by magic . let us make an appointment for a contest among us and let each of us be present at a certain time in the appointed place  .
if allah had not decreed banishment for them , he would certainly have chastised them in this world . as for the hereafter , the chastisement of the fire awaits them .
“ and i fear for my dependents after me , and my wife is barren . so grant me , from yourself , an heir .
yes.ableto proportion his fingertips .
he said : if you have come with a sign , then bring it , if you are of the truthful ones .
wealth and children are an ornament of the life of this world . but deeds of lasting merit are better rewarded by your lord and a far better source of hope .
woe , for thoseworshipers ! they mocked every messenger that came to them .
certainly , those who took the calf , wrath from their lord and humiliation will come upon them in the life of this world . thus do we recompense those who invent lies .
that is how to most of the polytheists the slaying of their children is presented as decorous by those whom they ascribe as partners , that they may ruin them and confound their religion for them . had allah wished , they would not have done it . so leave them with what they fabricate .
then we made true the promise we gave them and we delivered them , and whomsoever we would ; and we destroyed the prodigal .
were you witnesses when death approached jacob , when he said to his children , ‘ what will you worship after me ? ’ they said , ‘ we will worship your god and the god of your fathers , abraham , ishmael , and isaac , the one god , and to him do we submit . ’
he has created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and made good your shapes , and to him is the final return .
thus was the decree of thy lord proved true against the unbelievers ; that truly they are companions of the fire !
and were themselves witnesses of what they did with the believers .
on the day when we gather from every community a group of those who rejected our revelations ; and they will be restrained .
then he produced for them a calf , of saffron hue , which gave forth a lowing sound . and they cried : this is your god and the god of moses , but he hath forgotten .
and if we pleased we could paralyse them in their tracks , and they would not be able to move forward or turn back .
bring back to us our fathers if you are truthful . ”
follow what is revealed to you from your lord , and do not follow other masters beside him . little you recollect .
ye are therefrom averting .
by time ,
patient men , desirous of the face of their lord , who perform the prayer , and expend of that we have provided them , secretly and in public , and who avert evil with good -- theirs shall be the ultimate abode ,
on the day when the unbelievers and whatever they had been worshipping besides god will be resurrected , he will ask the idols ,  did you mislead my servants or did they themselves go astray from the right path ? 
and give him glory at the dawn and in the evening .
and those who believed afterwards and emigrated , and struggled with you they are of you . and in the book of allah , the near kinsmen deserve one another . allah has knowledge of all things .
as for man , whenever his lord trieth him by honouring him , and is gracious unto him , he saith : my lord honoureth me .
and when they hear any vain talk , they turn away from it , saying :  we have our deeds and you have your deeds . peace be to you . we do not desire to act like the ignorant . 
allah it is who hath created seven heavens , and of the earth the like thereof . the commandment cometh down among them slowly , that ye may know that allah is able to do all things , and that allah surroundeth all things in knowledge .
and every soul will come , with it a driver and a witness .
nor can you lead the blind out of their error . you can make only those hear who have faith in our signs and have submitted .
believers ! were you to obey a party of those who were given the book , they might cause you to renounce the truth after you have attained to faith .
for every happening is a finality , and you will surely know .
they say : 'allah has takena son ' exaltations to him . for him is what is in the heavens and the earth , all are obedient to him .
and they who disbelieve and belie our signs ! those shall be fellows of the fire , as abiders therein ; a hapless destination .
when the last hour dawns -- on that day they will be sorted out :
nay ! when it comes up to the throat ,
so i ran away from you out of fear . but my lord has given me wisdom , and made me an apostle .
accursed , wherever they are found , they will be seized and killed .
and wherefore , when ye heard it , did ye not say : it is not for us to speak thereof , hallowed be thou ! that is a slander mighty !
by thosesent forth in gusts
o my people , sovereignty is yours today , dominant in the land . but who would protect us from the punishment of allah if it came to us ?  pharaoh said ,  i do not show you except what i see , and i do not guide you except to the way of right conduct . 
by men whom neither traffic nor merchandise can divert from the remembrance of allah , nor from regular prayer , nor from the practice of regular charity : theirfear is for the day when hearts and eyes will be transformed , -
then you will indeed be raised up on the day of resurrection .
leave themin their desires and play around until they face that day which has been promised to them .
when he reached the prime of life we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward those who are good .
profound wisdom—but warnings are of no avail .
the bedouins who were left behind will say to thee , 'we were occupied by our possessions and our families ; so ask forgiveness for us ! ' they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts . say : 'who can avail you aught against god , if he desires hurt for you , or desires profit for you ? nay , but god is ever aware of the things you do .
and who is a greater wrongdoer than he who attributes falsehoods to god , when he is being invited to islam ? god does not guide the wrongdoing people .
i will cast him into hell .
and why should you not eat of that upon which the name of allah has been mentioned while he has explained in detail to you what he has forbidden you , excepting that to which you are compelled . and indeed do many leadastray through theirinclinations without knowledge . indeed , your lord - he is most knowing of the transgressors .
and we opened up the springs of the earth ; and the waters met for a decreed end .
o wives of the prophet ! whoever of you commits a proven indecency , the punishment for her will be doubled . and that would be easy for god .
say :  is it some one other than allah that ye order me to worship , o ye ignorant ones ? 
but your people have denied it while it is the truth . say ,  i am not over you a manager . 
they said , ‘ our lord , we have wronged ourselves ! if you do not forgive us and have mercy upon us , we will surely be among the losers . ’
we gave them the illuminating scripture
thus allah makes clear his commandments for you : it is expected that you will use your common sense .
hast thou not observed those who hold themselves purified nay ! allah purifieth whomsoever he will , and they shall not be wronged a whit .
i swear by the wind that scatters far and wide ,
but if they turn away , say , “ i have informed you sufficiently . although i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far . ”
god has decreed for you the dissolution of your oaths . god is your master . he is the all-knowing , the most wise .
or have they gods that can guard them from us ? they have no power to aid themselves , nor can they be defended from us .
and who is better in speech than him who prayeth unto his lord and doeth right , and saith : lo ! i am of those who are muslims .
and the harmdoers were seized by the shout , and in the morning , they were found crouched in their dwellings , dead ,
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and they who disbelieve in the verses of allah - it is those who are the losers .
allah gives abundantly and sparingly to whom he will . they rejoice in this present life ; but this present life , beside the everlasting life , is nothing but a passing enjoyment .
pure companions sheltered in pavilions .
his spouse and his sons—
the months for hajj are well known to all ; whoever makes up his mind to perform hajj during these fixed months , let him totally abstain from all sorts of sexual indulgence , wickedness and wrangling during the hajj and remember that allah knows whatever good you do . take necessary provisions for hajj , and piety is the best of all provisions : so refrain from disobeying me , o men of understanding !
invoke , “ o allah ! the creator of the heavens and the earth , the all knowing of all the hidden and the open , you will judge between your bondmen , regarding the matters in which they differed . ”
we certainly know that youare sad about what theysay . it is not youwho has been accused of lying . the unjust have always rejected god 's revelations .
we surely tried solomon , and placed another body on his throne . so he turned to god
who have faith in what has been revealed to you and others before you and have strong faith in the life hereafter .
nor canst thou lead back the blind from their straying : only those wilt thou make to hear , who believe in our signs and submit .
but whosoever comes with evil will be flung face forward into the fire . can you expect reward for any thing but what you do ?
and a believing man of fir'aun'sfamily , who hid his faith said :  would you kill a man because he says : my lord is allah , and he has come to you with clear signsfrom your lord ? and if he is a liar , upon him will behis lie ; but if he is telling the truth , then some of thatwherewith he threatens you will befall on you .  verily , allah guides not one who is a musrif , a liar !
he said : ' i shall ask my lord to forgive you . he is forgiving , the most merciful '
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations are residents of hell .
does it not guide the people who inherit the land from former people that we can punish them for their sins if we will ? and seal up their hearts so that they would not be able to lend an ear to words of guidance ?
surely we put solomon to the test and cast upon his throne a mere body . thereupon he penitently turned .
his is the dominion of the heavens and earth . and to allah are returnedmatters .
they shall certainly carry their loads , and other loads along with their loads , and upon the day of resurrection they shall surely be questioned concerning that they were forging .
then pharaoh sent among the cities musterers :
was the message sent down to him , out of all of us ? ” in fact , they are doubtful of my warning . in fact , they have not yet tasted my punishment .
they said , “ we have relied only upon allah ; our lord ! do not make us a test * for the unjust people . ”
see what similitudes they coin for thee , and thus are all astray , and can not find a road !
surely for those who guardis achievement ,
it is a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
god will humiliate them on the day of judgment and ask them ,  where are the idols which you had considered equal to me and which were the cause of hostility and animosity among you ?  the people who were given knowledge will say ,  it is the unbelievers who face disgrace and trouble on this day . 
that this is indeed the word of the noble messenger ,
and that he might know the hypocrites ' when it was said to them : 'come , fight or repel in the way of allah ' they replied : 'if only we knew how to fight , we would follow you ' on that day , they were nearer to disbelief than belief . they said with their mouths what was not in their hearts . and allah knows what they hide .
like the precedent of pharaoh ’ s clan and those who were before them , who denied the signs of their lord ; so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned pharaoh ’ s clan ; and they were all wrongdoers .
recall what time there were presented unto him , at eventide , s coursers swift-footed .
who have made the qur'an into portions .
thosewho said :  verily , allah has taken our promise not to believe in any messenger unless he brings to us an offering which the fireshall devour .  say :  verily , there came to you messengers before me , with clear signs and even with what you speak of ; why then did you kill them , if you are truthful ? 
until , when death comes to one of them , he says :  my lord ! send me back ,
and within yourselves . can you not perceive ?
then he said ,  make a few changes to her throne and let us see whether she will recognize it or not . 
then each will see what he had done in the past ; and they will turn to god , their true lord , and all the lies they had fabricated will be of no avail to them .
and those who keep their pledges and their covenant ,
if a wound touches you , a similar wound already has touched the nation . such days we alternate between the people so that allah knows those who believe , and that he will take witnesses from among you , for allah does not love the harmdoers ,
and he it is who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings , going before his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky , -
again , what could let you know what the day of recompense is !
and whatever blessings you have , are all from allah – then whenever misfortune reaches you , towards him only do you seek refuge .
let not the believers take disbelievers for their friends in preference to believers . whoso doeth that hath no connection with allah unlessthat ye but guard yourselves against them , takingsecurity . allah biddeth you bewareof himself . unto allah is the journeying .
what ! will man get whatever he dreams of ?
and be not like those who forgot allah , so he made them forget themselves . those are the defiantly disobedient .
wherefore we will surely cause those who disbelieve to taste a severe tor ment , and we will surely requite them the worst of that which they have been working .
of the sabbath was only sanctioned for those who disputed it . your lord will certainly issue his decree about their dispute on the day of judgment .
and they used to say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then , forsooth , be raised again ,
so he saw the morning in the city , looking about , in a state of fear , when behold , the man who had , the day before , sought his help called aloud for his help . moses said to him :  thou art truly , it is clear , a quarrelsome fellow ! 
god will not call you to account for your meaningless oaths , but he will call you to account for the oaths , which you swear in earnest . the expiation for a broken oath is the feeding of ten needy men with such food as you normally offer to your own people ; or the clothing of ten needy men ; or the freeing of one slave . anyone who lacks the means shall fast for three days . that is the expiation of your breaking the oaths that you have sworn . do keep your oaths . thus god explains to you his commandments , so that you may be grateful .
this book is a revelation from god , the majestic and all-wise .
that is because they opposed allah and his messenger . and whoever opposes allah and his messenger - indeed , allah is severe in penalty .
have fear of the one who has created you and the generations that lived before you . 
say ,  indeed , my prayer , my rites of sacrifice , my living and my dying are for allah , lord of the worlds .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greetwith one better than it orreturn it . indeed , allah is ever , over all things , an accountant .
then , we save our messengers and also those who believe . it is incumbent on us to deliver the believers . ' set fire to the whole city and its environs . the assyrian king set his own palace ablaze and was himself burnt to death .
we created you , why will you not believe !
there is a certain type of man who charms you in this worldly life with his glib talk . he calls allah to witness again and again that he cherishes good intentions in his heart , whereas , in fact , he is the deadliest opponent of the truth .
he will say , “ how many years did you remain on earth ? ”
then , when he reached it , he was called , “ o moses .
and he who findeth not , let him fast for two successive months before they touch one another ; and for him who is unable to do sothe feeding of sixty needy ones . this , that ye may put trust in allah and his messenger . such are the limits ; and for disbelievers is a painful doom .
we subjected the mountains to exaltwith him in the evening and at sunrise ,
and do not covet that by which allah has made some of you excel others ; men shall have the benefit of what they earn and women shall have the benefit of what they earn ; and ask allah of his grace ; surely allah knows all things .
when they are told , ‘ come to what allah has sent down andto the apostle , ’ they say , ‘ sufficient for us is what we have found our fathers following. ’ what , even if their fathers did not know anything and were not guided ? !
the likenesses of treasured pearls .
o you who have believed , spend from that which we have provided for you before there comes a day in which there is no exchange and no friendship and no intercession . and the disbelievers - they are the wrongdoers .
among the people there are those who say , ‘ we have faith in allah , ’ but if such a one is tormented in allah ’ s cause , he takes persecution by the people for allah ’ s punishment . yet if there comes any help from your lord , they will say , ‘ we were indeed with you. ’ does not allah know best what is in the breasts of the creatures ?
who delivered the messages of allah and feared him , and feared none save allah . allah keepeth good account .
 'what is the matter with you , that ye place not your hope for kindness and long-suffering in allah , -
and those who drive awaywith reproof
and recall when we asked the angels to prostrate themselves before adam ; all prostrated themselves except iblis , who said :  shall i prostrate myself before him whom you created of clay ? 
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , or cries lies to his signs ? they shall not prosper , the evildoers .
and when you divorce women and they have fulfilled their term , do not prevent them from remarrying theirhusbands if they agree among themselves on an acceptable basis . that is instructed to whoever of you believes in allah and the last day . that is better for you and purer , and allah knows and you know not .
aad belied their messengers .
and we shall ease you into facility .
believers , when you go forth in the cause of god , make due investigation and do not say to those who offer you the greeting of peace ,  you are no believer !  because you seek the good things of this life . with god there are good things in plenty . you yourself were in the same position before , but god conferred his special favour on you . therefore , take care to investigate . surely god is well-aware of what you do .
and associate him in my affair .
behold ! he approached his lord with a sound heart .
as for the faithless , they are heirs of one another . unless you do the same , there will be strife in the land and great corruption .
so he cast it down ; and lo ! it was a serpent running .
rather , we have brought them the truth , and indeed they are liars .
on lavish couches
he said , “ no food is served to you , but i have informed you about it before you have received it . that is some of what my lord has taught me . i have forsaken the tradition of people who do not believe in god ; and regarding the hereafter , they are deniers . ”
they also say ,  the fire of hell is not going to touch us , and even if it does at all , it will be only for a few days  . say ,  have you obtained a promise from allah which he would not break ? or , do you attribute to allah things you do not know ? why will not the fire of hell touch you ?
then , when he wills , he raises him .
o you who believe , do not follow in the footsteps of satan , for he who follows in the footsteps of satan will be induced by him to what is shameful and forbidden . but for the grace of god and his mercy upon you none of you would have escaped undefiled ; but god makes whosoever he will grow in goodness , for god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
if the enemy had entered from all sides and they had been exhorted to treachery , they would have committed it , and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
and recall what time ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure and keep me and my sons away from worshipping the idols .
this is a reminder . and indeed , for the righteous is a good place of return
“ except our earlier death , and nor will we be punished ? ”
they ask you about the bounties . say , “ the bounties are for god and the messenger. ” so be mindful of god , and settle your differences , and obey god and his messenger , if you are believers .
and to him only belong all those who are in the heavens and the earth ; all are submissive to him .
o people who believe ! be firm in establishing justice , giving witness for allah , even if it is harmful to yourselves or parents or relatives ; whether the one you testify against is wealthy or poor , for in any case allah has the greater right over it ; then do not follow your wishes for you may stray from the truth ; and if you distort testimony or turn away , then allah is well aware of your deeds .
thou wilt know in their faces the radiance of delight .
he said :  my lord ! forgive me , and bestow upon me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me : verily , you are the bestower . 
when they do aught that is shameful , they say :  we found our fathers doing so  ; and  allah commanded us thus  : say :  nay , allah never commands what is shameful : do ye say of allah what ye know not ? 
and made them virgin - pure , -
we know what the earth consumes of them , for we have the book that preserves everything .
said yusuf , “ i did this so that the governor may realise that i did not betray him behind his back , and allah does not let the deceit of betrayers be successful . ”
the day when they are dragged on their faces into the fire : 'taste now the touch of sakar ! '
so that they may understand my speech ,
when those who are godwary are touched by a visitation of satan , they rememberand , behold , they perceive .
say :  o my servants who have transgressed against their souls ! despair not of the mercy of allah : for allah forgives all sins : for he is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
does man suppose that we will not put together his bones ?
then mosesshowed him the great sign ;
it is these who will be honoured in gardens .
o people ! we created you from a male and a female , and made you races and tribes , that you may know one another . the best among you in the sight of god is the most righteous . god is all-knowing , well-experienced .
and we have set none but angels as guardians of the fire , and we have fixed their numberonly as a trial for the disbelievers , in order that the people of the scripturemay arrive at a certaintyis written in the tauratand the injeel ] and the believers may increase in faithand that no doubts may be left for the people of the scripture and the believers , and that those in whose hearts is a diseaseand the disbelievers may say :  what allah intends by thisexample ?  thus allah leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and none can know the hosts of your lord but he . and thisis nothing else than areminder to mankind .
other than allah , and guide them to the path of hellfire
they will have fine green silk and brocade , and they will be decked with bracelets of silver . their lord will provide them with a drink of pure wine .
and the angels will be ranged around its borders , while eight will be carrying the throne of your lord above them that day .
but those who repent and mend their ways , who hold fast to god and are sincere in their worship of god will be joined with the believers ; and god will bestow a great reward upon the believers .
god : there is no god but he ; and in god should believers place their trust .
they said :  ah ! woe to us ! we were indeed wrong-doers ! 
allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and on the day when the hourshall come to pass , the followers of falsehood shall be in utter loss .
but when sight is confounded
we shall make you recite the quran so that you will not forget any of it --
and others which you have not yet been able to achieve allah has surely encompassed them , and allah has power over all things .
therein is fruit and palms having sheathed clusters ,
they hear therein no idle talk , but only peace ; and therein they have food for morn and evening .
why , when thou wentest into thy garden , didst thou not say ,  as god will ; there is no power except in god  ? if thou seest me , that i am less than thou in wealth and children ,
and thy lord is the forgiver , owner of mercy . were he to call them to account for that which they have earned ; he would have hastened for them torment ; but for them is a tryst beside which they can not find a place to betake themselves to .
allah cursed him . and he ] said :  i will take an appointed portion of your slaves ;
and we saved him and those with him in the laden ship .
then he approached and descended
and because the last day will come , there is no doubt in it – and because allah will revive those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . but all this would have been nothing but the vanity of this world . the hereafter with your lord is for those who take heed for themselves and follow the straight path .
surely he has no authority over those who believe and rely on their lord .
when we shook the mount over them , as if it had been a canopy , and they thought it was going to fall on them :  hold firmly to what we have given you , and bringto remembrance what is therein ; perchance ye may fear allah . 
these are from the accounts of the townships , which we recount to you . of them , there are some that still stand , and some that have been mown down .
those who say ,  lord , we have believed in you . forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of fire , 
but those who have avoided taghut , lest they worship it , and turned back to allah - for them are good tidings . so give good tidings to my servants
we have revealed the book to youin all truth . it confirms thebible and has the authority to preserve or abrogate what the bible contains . judge among them by what god has revealed to you and do not follow their desires instead of the truth which has come to you . we have given a law and a way of life to each of you . had god wanted , he could have made you into one nation , but he wanted to see who are the more pious ones among you . compete with each other in righteousness . all of you will return to god who will tell you the truth in the matter of your differences .
 our lord ! forgive me and my parents , andthe believers on the day when the reckoning will be established . 
say : 'had there been angels walking at peace in the earth , we would have sent down an angel from heaven to them as a messenger '
indeed those who said : 'christ , the son of mary , he is indeed god ' , disbelieved . say : 'who could have overruled allah had he so willed to destroy christ , the son of mary , and his mother , and all those who are on earth ? ' for to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ; he creates what he wills . allah is all-powerful .
and , o my people ! what aileth me that i call you unto deliverance when ye call me unto the fire ?
he said , “ you throw ” ; when they threw , they cast a magic spell upon the people ’ s eyes and terrified them , and they brought a great magic .
they said :  either you cast , o moses , or we shall cast it first . 
allah has promised the believing men and women gardens underneath which rivers flow , in which they shall live for ever . goodly mansions in the gardens of eden , and the pleasure from allah which is greater . that is the greatest winning .
who do not pay zakah , and who deny the hereafter .
that day is true for certain . so let anyone who wishes take resort with his lord .
o descendants of adam ! adorn yourself when you go to the mosque , and eat and drink , and do not cross limits ; indeed he does not like the transgressors .
you will be committing no sin ifyou seek to obtain any bounty from your lord . when you return from arafat , remember god at the sacred place , and remember him as he has guided you . before this you were surely astray .
he placed stabilizers over it ; and blessed it ; and planned its provisions in four days , equally to the seekers .
and by oath of the morning when it takes birth .
and a curse was made to follow them in the world and on the day of resurrection . lo ! a'ad disbelieved in their lord . a far removal for a'ad , the folk of hud !
'we will not cease , ' they said , 'to cleave to it , until moses returns to us . ' )
when he showed them our miracles , they started to laugh at them .
they ask you about revelation . say , revelation is by the command of your lord , and that you have been given but little knowledge .
or has he not been told of what is in the scrolls of moses ,
then his lord chose him , and inclined towards him with his mercy , and guided him .
then shall some of them advance to others , questioning each other .
she said , “ how can i have a son , when no man has touched me , and i was never unchaste ? ”
and remember god 's blessing upon you , and his compact which he made with you when you said , 'we have heard and we obey . and fear you god ; surely god knows the thoughts in the breasts .
whatever blessing you have is from god , and to him you turn for help when distress befalls you ,
and therein we prescribed for them : ' a life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , an ear for an ear , a tooth for a tooth , and for wounds retaliation ' ; but whosoever forgoes it as a freewill offering , that shall be for him an expiation . whoso judges not according to what god has sent down -- they are the evildoers .
just considerthat you emit ,
whatever palm-tree you cut down or leave standing upon its roots , it is by allah 's command , and that he may abase the transgressors .
they will be admitted to the gardens of eden wherein streams flow . they will rest on soft couches , decked with bracelets of gold and clothed in green silk garments and shining brocade . how blissful is such a reward and resting place !
on the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify against them as to what they used to do ,
and a koran we have divided , for thee to recite it to mankind at intervals , and we have sent it down successively .
most surely in the variation of the night and the day , and what allah has created in the heavens and the earth , there are signs for a people who guard .
and glorify him after the setting of the stars .
move not your tongue with it , , to hasten with recitation of the qur'an .
for to allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth ; and allah is exalted in power , full of wisdom .
save unto every messenger whom he hath chosen , and then he maketh a guard to go before him and a guard behind him
he has the keys to the realm that lies beyond the reach of human perception ; none knows them but he . and he knows what is on the land and in the sea ; there is not a leaf which falls that he does not know about and there is not a grain in the darkness of the earth or anything green or dry which has not been recorded in a clear book .
woe , then , to those that give the lie ,
forbidden to youare : al-maytatah , blood , the flesh of swine , and the meat of that which has been slaughtered as a sacrifice for others than allah , or has been slaughtered for idols , etc. , or on which allah 's name has not been mentioned while slaughtering , and that which has been killed by strangling , or by a violent blow , or by a headlong fall , or by the goring of horns - and that which has beeneaten by a wild animal - unless you are able to slaughter it- and that which is sacrificedon an-nusub .also is to use arrows seeking luck or decision , that is fisqun . this day , those who disbelieved have given up all hope of your religion , so fear them not , but fear me . this day , i have perfected your religion for you , completed my favour upon you , and have chosen for you islam as your religion . but as for him who is forced by severe hunger , with no inclination to sin , then surely , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
are they waiting , then , for anything else than the last hour to suddenly come upon them ? already some of its tokens have come . but when it does actually come upon them , where will any time be left for them to take heed ?
has it not , then , become plain to those who have inherited the earth in the wake of the former generations that , had we so willed , we could have afflicted them for their sins , we seal their hearts so that they hear nothing .
have they not journeyed in the land and observed the fate of those who preceded them ? they were superior to them in strength . but nothing can defeat god in the heavens or on earth . he is indeed omniscient and omnipotent .
do they not consider how many a generation we have destroyed before them , whom we had established in the earth as we have not established you , and we sent the clouds pouring rain on them in abundance , and we made the rivers to flow beneath them , then we destroyed them on account of their faults and raised up after them another generation .
we have indeed set constellations in the heavens and have beautified them for the beholders ,
by the promised day ,
then she brought himto her people , carrying him . they said :  o mary ! indeed you have brought a thing fariya .
those who invoke not , with allah , any other god , nor slay such life as allah has made sacred except for just cause , nor commit fornication ; - and any that does thismeets punishment .
the people of paradise shall be happily occupied on that day ,
give them an example about worldly life . it is like the vegetation of the earth that thrives when watered by the rain , which we send down from the sky , and then it all becomes stubble which the wind blows away . god has power over all things .
and there areuses in them for you , and that over them you may satisfy any need that is in your breasts , and you are carried on them and on ships .
say , “ i offer you a single advice : devote yourselves to god , in pairs , or individually ; and reflect . there is no madness in your friend . he is just a warner to you , before the advent of a severe punishment . ”
he said ,  do you bring me such news despite my old age ? what kind of good news are you bringing me ? 
, you do not knowit will come .
the blind and the seeing are surely not alike , nor those who believe and act rightly and those who do evil . little do you reflect !
and when it was said unto them : dwell in this township and eat therefrom whence ye will , and say  repentance ,  and enter the gate prostrate ; we shall forgive you your sins ; we shall increasefor the right-doers .
these are of the reports of the towns—we relate them to you . some are still standing , and some have withered away .
and joseph said to his servants :  put surreptitiously in their packs the goods they had given in exchange for corn .  joseph did so expecting that they would find it when they returned home . feeling grateful for this generosity , they might be inclined to return to him .
then indeed , you , astray deniers ,
the earth and its spreading out ,
they said ,  by allah , indeed you are in yourold error . 
except for an old woman who lagged behind .
so fear god , and obey me .
and they say :  if we follow the guidance with you , we would be snatched away from our land .  have we not established for them a secure sanctuary , to which are brought fruits of all kinds , a provision from ourselves , but most of them know not .
 and ye dwelt in the dwellings of men who wronged their own souls ; ye were clearly shown how we dealt with them ; and we put forthparables in your behoof ! 
and theysay ,  the fireshall not touch us but for a few numbered days .  say :  have you taken a covenant from allah , so that allah will not break his covenant ? or is it that you say of allah what you know not ? 
with a rope of palm fibre around her neck .
let there be one nation of you that shall call to righteousness , ordering honor , and forbidding dishonor . those are the prosperous .
but they splintered themselves into factions . they will all return to us .
the jews say  the christians have nothingto stand on ,  and the christians say ,  the jews have nothing to stand on ,  although theyrecite the scripture . thus the polytheists speak the same as their words . but allah will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that over which they used to differ .
 o ye assembly of jinns and men ! came there not unto you messengers from amongst you , setting forth unto you my signs , and warning you of the meeting of this day of yours ?  they will say :  we bear witness against ourselves .  it was the life of this world that deceived them . so against themselves will they bear witness that they rejected faith .
o you who have believed , when youprivately consult the messenger , present before your consultation a charity . that is better for you and purer . but if you find not- then indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
god has given you victory in numerous regions ; but on the day of hunayn , your great number impressed you , but it availed you nothing ; and the land , as spacious as it was , narrowed for you ; and you turned your backs in retreat .
but they called their companion , and he dared and hamstrung .
those who are avaricious of the favors that god has given them should not think that this is good for them . avarice is evil and whatever they are avaricious about will be tied to their necks on the day of judgment . to god belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth . god is well aware of what you do .
except to the path of hell , where they will dwell forever . and that is easy for god .
'yet if thou stretchest out thy hand against me , to slay me , i will not stretch out my hand against thee , to slay thee ; i fear god , the lord of all being .
these are the tidings of the townships , which we relate to you– some of them still stand and some are cut off .
we have certainly come to believe in our lord that he may forgive our trespasses and the magic you have forced us to perform , for god is nobler and abiding . 
should you question them what they were talking about , they would certainly say :  we were merely jesting and being playful .  tell them :  was it allah and his revelation and his messenger that you were mocking ? 
and they shall not bring to you any argument , but we have brought to youwith truth and best in significance .
say , ‘ tell me about your ‘ partners ’ whom you invoke besides allah ? show me whatof the earth have they created . have they any share in the heavens ? ’ have we given them a scripture so that they stand on a manifest proof from it ? no , the wrongdoers do not promise one anotherexcept delusion .
for to us will be their return ;
itis nothing but revelation sent down to him .
he said ,  i perceived what they did not see . so i took a handfulfrom the footprint of the messenger and threw it in . that is what my inner self prompted me to do . 
the pharaoh said to the magicians ,  you declared your belief in himwithout my permission . this is a plot to throw my people out of their city . but you will soon know .
say : what thing is of most weight in testimony ? say : allah is witness between me and you . and this qur'an hath been inspired in me , that i may warn therewith you and whomsoever it may reach . do ye in sooth bear witness that there are gods beside allah ? say : i bear no such witness . say : he is only one allah . lo ! i am innocent of that which ye associate .
do they not see how we conduct the water to a dry land , and with it we produce vegetation , from which their livestock eat , and themselves ? do they not see ?
so most supreme is allah , the true king ; there is no god except him ; lord of the throne of honour .
the righteously striving believers should have no fear of being treated with injustice or inequity .
but when he trieth him , restricting his subsistence for him , then saith he ,  my lord hath humiliated me ! 
for them will be fruits and whatever they ask .
and worship your lord until what is certaincomes to you .
and they said : are we going to abandon our gods on account of a poet distracted ?
proclaim , “ physically i am a human like you – i receive the divine revelation that your god is only one god , therefore be upright towards him and seek forgiveness from him ” ; and woe is to the polytheists . –
these are the verses of the clear book .
say , “ i do not know whether what you are promised is near , or whether my lord will extend it for a period . ”
“ allah – there is no true god except him , the owner of the great throne . ”
they do not believe in the truth and they exactly follow the tradition of the ancient
though he may put forth his excuses .
the good things have this day been made lawful to you . the food of those to whom the book was given is lawful to you , and your food is lawful to them . lawful to youare the free believing women and the free women from among those who were given the book before you , provided that you give them their dowries in marriage , neither committing fornication nor taking them as mistresses . whosoever denies the belief , his labors will be annulled . in the everlasting life he is of the losers .
and those who come after them say : our lord ! forgive us and those of our brethren who had precedence of us in faith , and do not allow any spite to remain in our hearts towards those who believe , our lord ! surely thou art kind , merciful .
and remembersthe name of his lord , and prays .
butrepentance is not for those who go on committing misdeeds : when death approaches any of them , he says , ‘ i repent now. ’ nor is it for those who die while they are faithless . for such we have prepared a painful punishment .
and she said unto his sister : trace him . so she observed him from afar , and they perceived not .
woe to everyscandal-monger and-backbiter ,
therefore the end of both of them is that they are both in the fire to abide therein , and that is the reward of the unjust .
he said , “ i only complain of my grief and sorrow to god , and i know from god what you do not know . ”
and his wealth shall be of no avail to him when he perishes .
allah wishes to lightenfor you ; and man was created weak .
it is he who sent down to thee , in truth , the book , confirming what went before it ; and he sent down the lawand the gospelbefore this , as a guide to mankind , and he sent down the criterion .
when mankind are musteredthey will be their enemies , and they will disavow their worship .
“ o my people ! who will support me against god , if i dismiss them ? will you not give a thought ? ”
 taste ye your trial ! this is what ye used to ask to be hastened ! 
so we seized him and his hosts , and cast them into the sea . he became an object of much blame .
god knows the hidden reality of the heavens and the earth . he has full knowledge of what is in the hearts of men ;
most auspicious is he who , if he wills , may make it much better for you – gardens beneath which rivers flow , and may create high palaces for you .
but how are you to know ?
in gardens of delight .
wherefore canst thou make the deaf to hear , or canst thou guide the blind or him who is is error manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you , it is because of what your hands have earned ; and yet he pardons much .
this is because of thatwhich your hands have sent before you . and certainly , allah is never unjust toslaves .
and if they desire treachery against thee , they have tricked god before ; but he has given thee power over them ; and god is all-knowing , all-wise .
he shall be at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and drive them into hell like cattle driven to water -- what an evil watering-place to reach !
and by the scatterers scattering
verily in joseph and his brethren are signsfor the inquiring .
‘ why is it that you do not support one another ? ’
theyobeyed the rabbis and the monks and worshipped the messiah , son of mary , as they should have obeyed god . they were commanded to worship no one besides god who is the only god and who is too exalted to be considered equal to any idols .
those are the ones who have exchanged guidance for error and forgiveness for punishment . how patient they are in pursuit of the fire !
devoting yourself to allah , not ascribing any partner to him ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah is as if he has fallen from the sky and the birds snatch him or the wind blows him away to a far-off place .
and those who committed evils , and repented thereafter and believed -- verily thy lord is thereafter forgiving , merciful .
but only as a reminder to him who tears ,
they are guided unto gentle speech ; they are guided unto the path of the glorious one .
and ask :  to whom belongs what is in the heavens and the earth ?  say :  to god .  he has prescribed grace for himself . he will gather you on the day of resurrection which is certain to come . only they who are lost of soul will not come to believe .
when god 's servant stood up to pray to him , they pressed close to him in great numbers , almost stifling him .
surely it shall be closed over upon them ,
and those who feared their lord will be driven unto the garden in troops till , when they arrive thereto , and the portals thereof will be opened , the keepers thereof will say unto them : peace be unto you ! excellent are ye ! enter it as abiders .
know god is terrible in retribution , and god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
if ye sought a judgment , now hath the judgment come unto you . and if ye ceaseit will be better for you , but if ye returnwe also shall return . and your host will avail you naught , however numerous it be , andthat allah is with the believers .
say : 'if you love allah , follow me and allah will love you , and forgive your sins . allah is forgiving and merciful '
being mean towards you . when fear comes to them , you see them looking at you , their eyes rolling as though they were on the point of death . but once the fear departs they assail you with their sharp tongues , being greedy to possess good things . those have never believed ; allah has annulled their deeds . that is easy for allah .
and say :  my lord ! cause me to land at a blessed landing-place , for you are the best of those who bring to land . 
and of them are some who listen unto thee . but canst thou make the deaf to hear even though they apprehend not ?
most auspicious is the name of your lord , the most majestic and the most honourable .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers - upon them will be the curse of allah and of the angels and the people , all together ,
not so those who are patient and do good deeds . they shall have forgiveness and a great reward .
said ,  if you come with a sign , then produce it , if you are telling the truth . 
i will surely roast him in the scorching .
waxing proud against it , talking foolish talk by night . '
save these on whom thy lord hath mercy ; and for that he hath created them . and fulfilled will be the word of thy lord : surely i will fill hell with the jinn and mankind together .
“ you worship only idols instead of allah , and only forge a clear lie ; indeed those whom you worship instead of allah do not control your sustenance – therefore seek your sustenance from allah , and worship him , and be grateful to him ; it is towards him that you will be returned . ”
did you not see that allah has given in your control all that is in the earth – and the ship that moves upon the sea by his command ? and he restricts the heavens that it may not fall on to the earth except by his command ; indeed allah is most compassionate , most merciful upon mankind .
it is he whom allah guides , that is on true guidance ; but he whom he leaves astray - for such wilt thou find no protector besides him . on the day of judgment we shall gather , them together , prone on their faces , blind , dumb , and deaf : their abode will be hell : every time it shows abatement , we shall increase from them the fierceness of the fire .
 and how can you have patience about a thing which you know not ? 
men who celebrate the praises of allah , standing , sitting , and lying down on their sides , and contemplate thecreation in the heavens and the earth , :  our lord ! not for naught hast thou createdthis ! glory to thee ! give us salvation from the penalty of the fire .
but he was only a servant we favoured and made an example for the children of israel :
the magicians said :  moses , will you throw down or shall we be the first to throw ? 
and similar other punishments in pairs .
and say to the believing women , that they lower their gaze cast down their eyes and guard their chastity , and do not reveal their adornment except that which is outward ; and let them draw their veils over their neck , and not reveal their adornment except to their husbands , or their fathers , or their husbands ' fathers , or their sons , or their husbands ' sons , or their brothers , or their brothers ' sons , or their sisters ' sons , or their women , or what their right hands own , or such male attendants having no sexual desire , or children who have not yet attained knowledge of women 's private parts ; nor let them stamp their feet , so that their hidden ornament is known . and , o believers turn to allah all together , in order that you prosper .
alif lam mim .
and the weighingthat day will be the truth . so those whose scales are heavy - it is they who will be the successful .
thus , he deceitfully showed them . when they had tastedfrom the tree , their private parts became revealed to them and they began to cover their private parts with leaves from the garden . their lord then called out to them saying ,  did i not forbid you to eatfrom the tree and tell you that satan was your sworn enemy ? 
there is not a word he utters but an observer is ready .
that is allah , your lord , creator of all things ; there is no deity except him , so how are you deluded ?
verily the first house set apart unto mankind was that at bakka , blest , and a guidance unto the worlds .
or , is there for you a clear warranty
“ how remote , how remote is the promise you are given ! ”
in this wise allah expoundeth unto you his commandments , haply ye may reflect .
and let not the owners of affluence and amplitude among you swear off from giving unto the kindred and the needy and the emigrants in the way of allah ; let them pardon and overlook . love ye not that allah should forgive you and allah is forgiving , merciful .
surely , you and what you serve .
that is why we decreed for the children of israel that whosoever kills a human being , exceptfor murder or for spreading corruption in the land , it shall be like killing all humanity ; and whosoever saves a life , saves the entire human race . our apostles brought clear proofs to them ; but even after that most of them committed excesses in the land .
when their eyes turn to the dwellers of hell , they will pray ,  lord , do not place us among the unjust . 
that it may give admonition to anyalive , and that the charge may be proved against those who reject .
if all the trees on earth were pens , filled by the ocean , with seven more oceans besides , the words of god would not run out . god is majestic and wise .
as for aad , they behaved proudly in the earth without right . 'who is stronger than us ' they would say . could they not see that allah , who created them , is stronger than they ? but they disbelieved our signs .
you cause the day to enter into the night and the night to enter into the day . you cause the living to come out of the dead and the dead to come out of the living . you give sustenance to whomever you want without keeping an account .
nothing that is said to you has not already been said to other messengers before you . indeed , your lord is a lord of forgiveness , but stern in retribution .
most surely we help our apostles , and those who believe , in this world 's life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand
 were not my signs rehearsed to you , and ye did but treat them as falsehood ? 
he is god : there is no deity save him . he knows the unseen and the visible . he is the compassionate , the merciful .
indeed we have heavy fetters and a blazing fire .
and do not dispute with the followers of the book except by what is best , except those of them who act unjustly , and say : we believe in that which has been revealed to us and revealed to you , and our allah and your allah is one , and to him do we submit .
so moosa put down his staff and it became a visible serpent .
till the time when yajuj and majuj are released , and they will be flowing down from every height .
and of his signs is that the heaven and the earth stand at his disposal . and then , when he calls you out of the earth , you will emerge at once .
it is he who created the night and the day , the sun and the moon , each swimming in an orbit .
and others chained in fetters .
indeed , those who disbelieve spend their wealth to avertfrom the way of allah . so they will spend it ; then it will be for them aregret ; then they will be overcome . and those who have disbelieved - unto hell they will be gathered .
say ,  belief in god and following the guidance of islam are god 's means of purification for us . islam is the baptism of god . no one is a better baptizer than he and we muslims worship him . 
and the jinn we had created before from flaming fire .
therein a running fountain ,
it is for the poor emigrants , who were expelled from their habitations and their possessions , seeking bounty from god and good pleasure , and helping god and his messenger ; those -- they are the truthful ones .
who persevere in devotion ,
as for those who sell the faith they owe to allah and their own plighted word for a small price , they shall have no portion in the hereafter : nor will allahspeak to them or look at them on the day of judgment , nor will he cleans them : they shall have a grievous penalty .
and gardens , dense with many trees ,
and it is not the word of an accursed devil .
for the needy and the deprived ,
as for those who believeand do righteous good deeds , for them are gardensas an entertainment , for what they used to do .
and noah called to his lord and said ,  my lord , indeed my son is of my family ; and indeed , your promise is true ; and you are the most just of judges ! 
we ordered them all to get out of the garden and told them that when our guidance came to them , those who would follow it would have neither fear nor grief .
these it was who disbelieved and debarred you from the inviolable place of worship , and debarred the offering from reaching its goal . and if it had not been for believing men and believing women , whom ye know not - lest ye should tread them under foot and thus incur guilt for them unknowingly ; that allah might bring into his mercy whom he will - ifhad been clearly separated we verily had punished those of them who disbelieved with painful punishment .
saying : make thou complete coats of mail , and rightly dispose the links , and work ye , righteously ; verily i am of that which ye work a beholder .
and whoso is not able to afford to marry free , believing women , let them marry from the believing maids whom your right hands possess . allah knoweth bestyour faith . yeone from another ; so wed them by permission of their folk , and give unto them their portions in kindness , they being honest , not debauched nor of loose conduct . and if when they are honourably married they commit lewdness they shall incur the half of the punishmentfor free women . this is for him among you who feareth to commit sin . but to have patience would be better for you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who disbelieved and gave the lie to our signs are rightfully the inmates of the blazing flame .
and we created for them from the likes of it that which they ride .
they have made their oaths a screen . thus they hinderfrom the path of allah . verily , evil is what they used to do .
and those cities - we destroyed them when they wronged , and we made for their destruction an appointed time .
he said , “ it worries me that you would take him away . and i fear the wolf may eat him while you are careless of him . ”
this is the promise of god . god does not ignore his promise , but many people do not know .
and made the day for seeking livelihood .
then did i punish those who disbelieved , so how was the manifestation of my disapproval ?
and do you take to you castles , haply to dwell forever ?
these are but names , which you have coined—you and your fathers—for which allah has not sent down any authority . they follow nothing but conjectures and the desires of thesoul , while there has already come to them the guidance from their lord .
surefy we would have been the bondmen of god sincere .
like are they unto the wont of the house of fir'awn and those before them . they belied the signs of their lord ; wherefore we destroyed them for their sins , and drowned the house of fir'awn ; and all of them were wrong-doers .
saying ,  we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
no ! those  gods  will deny their worship of them and will be against them opponents .
in this quran , we have set out all kinds of examples for people , yet most of them persist in denying the truth .
he was among our believing servants .
when thy lord was revealing to the angels , ' i am with you ; so confirm the believers . i shall cast into the unbelievers ' hearts terror ; so smite above the necks , and smite every finger of them ! '
but those who disbelieve and deny our revelations , such are owners of the fire ; they will abide therein - a hapless journey 's end !
in the gardens of eden promised by ar-rahman to his creatures in the unknown . verily his promise will come to pass .
your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul . god is hearing and seeing .
and convey good news to those who believe and do good deeds , that they shall have gardens in which rivers flow ; whenever they shall be given a portion of the fruit thereof , they shall say : this is what was given to us before ; and they shall be given the like of it , and they shall have pure mates in them , and in them , they shall abide .
so hold fast to what has been revealed to you . indeed , you are on a straight path .
and we will aid them with fruit and flesh such as they desire .
and we desired that their lord should grant them another in his place , a son more upright and more tender hearted .
and they said , “ do not give up your gods ; do not give up wadd , nor souwa , nor yaghoos , and yaooq , and nassr .
try to confuse what we have revealed to you so that they may falsely ascribe to us something other than the true revelation and thus establish friendship with you .
and in the earth there are signs for those who are sure ,
and the people of noah , when they cried lies to the messengers , we drowned them , and made them to be a sign to mankind ; and we have prepared for the evildoers a painful chastisement .
the sinners will be recognised by their marks , and seized by the forelock and their feet .
do not approach the orphan ’ s property , except in the bestmanner , until he comes of age . and observe fully the measure and the balance with justice. ’ we task no soul except according to its capacity . ‘ and when you speak , be fair , even if it were a relative ; and fulfill allah ’ s covenant . this is what he enjoins upon you so that you may take admonition . ’
is he not aware that when whatever liesin the graves is overthrown ;
and said , ‘ indeed i am sick ! ’
or do they say , “ a poet—we await for him a calamity of time ” ?
say :  travel in the land and see what was the end of those before ! most of them were mushrikun . 
and recall when moosa said to his assistant , “ i will not give up until i reach the place where the two seas meet or until i have progressed for ages . ”
if you are upon a journey and a scribe can not be found , then let pledges be taken . if any of you trusts another let the trusted deliver his trust ; and let him fear allah his lord . and you shall not conceal the testimony . he who conceals it , his heart is sinful . allah has knowledge of what you do .
there has certainly come to you an apostle from among yourselves . grievous to him is your distress ; he has deep concern for you , and is most kind and merciful to the faithful .
say : our lord will bring us all together , then he will judge between us with truth . he is the all-knowing judge .
and fulfill the covenant of allah when you have made a covenant , and do not break the oaths after making them fast , and you have indeed made allah a surety for you ; surely allah knows what you do .
and there are others who have acknowledged their sins and mixed a good deed with another that was bad ; it is likely that allah will accept their repentance ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
return to your father and say , 'father , your son has committed a theft . we testify only to what we know . how could we guard against the unforeseen ?
warn those who fear , through this , that they will be gathered before their lord , and they will have none to protect or intercede for them apart from him . they may haply take heed for themselves .
 but verily ! i am going to send him a present , and see with whatthe messengers return . 
and we admitted him into our mercy . indeed , he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but is god 's messenger and the seal of the prophets . god has knowledge of all things .
peace until the rising of the dawn .
surely god is my lord and your lord ; so serve him . this is a straight path  . '
he thinks that his wealth will make him immortal .
it is notallah that he should lead a people astray after he has guided them ; he even makes clear to them what they should guard against ; surely allah knows all things .
on the day when we call every nation with their leaders , those whose record of deeds are given to their right hands will read the book and the least wrong will not be done to them .
whatever good they do , they will not go unappreciated for it , and allah knows well the godwary .
when the seas are merged ,
therefore we perverted you , and we ourselves were perverts . '
and if ye divorce them ere ye have touched them but have settled unto them a settlement , then due from you is half of that which ye have settled unless the wives forego , or he in whose hand is the wedding-knot foregoeth , and that ye should forego is nigher unto piety . and forget not grace amongst yourself ; verily of that which ye work allah is the beholder .
we have made the deeds of those who do not believe in the life to come , attractive to them and they wander about blindly .
he raised its ceiling and proportioned it .
then adam receivedwords from his lord , so he turned to him mercifully ; surely he is oft-returning , the merciful .
we sent forth noah to his nation . he said : 'worship allah , my people for you have no god except he . i fear for you the punishment of a great day . '
‘ no , it is we who have been deprived ! ’
have we not made the earth as a wide expanse ,
yet when it is said to them , “ beware of what lies before you , and what lies behind you , that you may receive mercy . ”
and thou wast notto recite a book before this , nor art thouto transcribe it with thy right hand : in that case , indeed , would the talkers of vanities have doubted .
but they said , 'our lord , prolong the stages of our travel ' ; and they wronged themselves , so we made them as but tales , and we tore them utterly to pieces . surely in that are signs for every man enduring , thankful .
may god pardon you ! why did you permit them to do so before it had become clear to you which ones were truthful , so that you might recognize the liars ?
whose eyes were veiled against my warning , and they could not hear .
and in the past we gave moses the book and yet it became an object of dispute . if your lord 's decree had not gone forth before , a decisive judgement would have been made among them , once and for all . surely they are in a disquieting doubt about it .
“ eat and drink with pleasure – the reward of what you sent ahead , in the past days . ”
has he invented this falsehood against god or is he possessed by jinn ?  however , those who do not have any faith in the life to come will suffer torment for their serious error .
indeed in the heavens and the earth are signs for believers .
whoever earns evil and becomes engrossed in sin shall be doomed to hell and abide therein for ever .
both of you go to himand say :  we are the messengers of your lord . let the children of israel depart with us , and do not punish them . we have come to you with a sign from your lord ; peace be on him who follows guidance !
he will forgive you your sins , and admit you to gardens beneath which rivers flow , and to beautiful mansions in gardens of eternity : that is indeed the supreme achievement .
and we sent to no city a prophetexcept that we seized its people with poverty and hardship that they might humble themselves .
they are deaf , blind , and dumb and can not regain their senses .
and by oath of those you do not see .
and had it not been that allah had decreed exile for them , he would certainly have punished them in this world , and in the hereafter theirs shall be the torment of the fire .
or lest you say , 'if the book had been sent down upon us , we had surely been more rightly guided than they . ' yet indeed a clear sign has come to you from your lord , and a guidance and a mercy ; and who does greater evil than he who cries lies to god 's signs , and turns away from them ? we shall surely recompense those who turn away from our signs with an evil chastisement for their turning away .
so allah seized him in exemplary punishment for the last and the first .
she said :  o my lord ! how shall i have a son when no man has touched me .  he said :  sofor allah creates what he wills . when he has decreed something , he says to it only :  be !  and it is .
lo , when the waters rose , we bore you in the running ship
and we sent down rain from water-laden clouds pouring in torrents
when the youths took shelter in the cave , they said , “ our lord , give us mercy from yourself , and bless our affair with guidance . ”
then we inspired musa :  strike the sea with your stick .  and it parted , and each separate partbecame like the huge , firm mass of a mountain .
who all were insolent in the land
and from the fruits of the palm trees and grapevines you take intoxicant and good provision . indeed in that is a sign for a people who reason .
then the believers will say : 'are thosewho solemnly swore by allah that they would stand by you ' their works will be annulled and they shall be the losers .
and when the truthcame to them , theysaid :  this is magic , and we disbelieve therein . 
but their belief was not going to profit them when they had seen our punishment ; allah 's law , which has indeed obtained in the matter of his servants , and there the unbelievers are lost .
and if you invite them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you , whether you invite them , or remain silent .
upon that day unto thy lord shall be the driving .
it was he who restrained their hands from you and your hands from them in the hollowof mecca after he had given you victory over them . allah sees the things you do .
it shall avert from her the chastisement if she testify by god four times that he is of the liars ,
those are the companions of paradise , abiding eternally therein as reward for what they used to do .
for them are good tidings in the worldly life and in the hereafter . no change is there in the words of allah . that is what is the great attainment .
and wert thou to ask them : who sendeth down water from the heaven , and therewith quickeneth the earth after the death thereof ? they would surely say : allah . say thou : all praise unto allah ! aye ! most of them reflect not .
like the ways of firaun ’ s people , and those before them ; they disbelieved in the signs of allah – therefore allah seized them on account of their sins ; indeed allah is most powerful , severe in punishing .
in his absence , the people of moses adopted a calf made from their ornaments—a body which lowed . did they not see that it could not speak to them , nor guide them in any way ? they took it for worship . they were in the wrong .
jacob replied ,  i shall be grieved if you take him with you ; i fear that some wild-beast will harm him in your absence . 
and two young men went to prison with him . one of them said : i dreamed that i was pressing wine . the other said : i dreamed that i was carrying upon my head bread whereof the birds were eating . announce unto us the interpretation , for we see thee of those good .
and when it is recited to them they say : we believe in it surely it is the truth from our lord ; surely we were submitters before this .
he is god ; the creator , the maker , the designer . his are the most beautiful names . whatever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies him . he is the majestic , the wise .
he answered :  you will surely not be able to bear with me .
thosewho say : 'allah has promised us that we do not believe in a messenger unless he brings to us an offering that fire consumes ' say : 'indeed messengers have come to you before me with clear proofs and with that of which you spoke . why did you kill them , if what you say is true '
woe then unto those who write out the book with their hands and say thereafter : this is from god , that they may barter it for a small price . woe then unto them for that which thei hands had written ; and woe unto them for that which they earn therwith .
and if you asked them , “ who sends water down from the sky , with which he revives the earth after it had died ? ” they would say , “ god. ” say , “ praise be to god. ” but most of them do not understand .
we are those who stand ranged in ranks .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and illumination , and a reminder for the righteous .
except by way of mercy from us , and by way ofconveniencefor a time .
then i will guide thee to thy lord and thou shalt fear .
let man consider what he was made of :
this is the garden which we cause those of our servants to inherit who guard .
so he went forth to his people in his finery . those who desire this world 's life said : o would that we had the like of what qaroun is given ; most surely he is possessed of mighty good fortune .
say : 'in the bounty of god , and his mercy -- in that let them rejoice ; it is better than that they amass .
we have made it a reminder , and a blessing to the traveler .
and the people of paradise shall cry to the people of hell : 'surely we have found our lord 's promise to us to be true . have you also found true what your lord has promised you ? ' 'yes ' , they shall answer ; and a herald shall cry out among them : 'allah 's curse be upon the wrong-doers ' ;
and warn your tribeof near kindred .
when his lord said to him :  obey ,  he replied :  i submit to the lord of all the worlds . 
they will swear by allah to you when you return to them that you would leave them alone . so leave them alone ; indeed they are evil ; and their refuge is hell as recompense for what they had been earning .
they said :  who has done this to our aliha ? he must indeed be one of the wrong-doers . 
peace be upon the house of elijah .
if he will , he calms the wind so that they remain motionless upon its back , surely , there are signs in this for every thankful , patient .
he said : if thou hast brought a sign , forth with it then , if thou art of the truth-tellers .
and , o my people ! i fear for you the day of calling out ,
they were only commanded to worship god , be uprightly devoted to his religion , steadfast in prayer and pay the zakat . this is truly the eternal religion .
and hell is brought near that day ; on that day man will remember , but how will the remembrance ?
he causes the dawn to break ; and he has made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning ; this is an arrangement of the mighty , the knowing .
a revelation from the entirely merciful , the especially merciful -
be not deceived by the comings and goings of unbelievers in the land .
and abraham indeed was of his inducement ,
and see them thou ; they themselves shall presently see .
and when he turns away , he creates turmoil in the earth and destroys crops and lives ; and allah is not pleased with turmoil .
o people who believe – fight the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know well that allah is with the pious .
thus , from the sinful people we made enemies for every prophet . your lord is a sufficient guide and helper .
thou art but a warner for such as fear it .
or do they say that there is madness in him ? nay , he has brought them the truth and it is the truth that most of them disdain .
believers , when you talk in secret do not talk together in sin and hatred , and disobedience towards the messenger , but talk of piety and caution . fear allah before whom you shall be gathered .
when man suffers some affliction , he prays to his lord and turns to him in penitence , but once he has been granted a favour from god , he forgets the one he had been praying to and sets up rivals to god , to make others stray from his path . say ,  enjoy your unbelief for a little while : you will be one of the inmates of the fire . 
the righteously striving believers will have a never-ending reward  .
tell them the story of noah . he said to his people ,  my people , if my presence among you and my preaching to you of god 's revelations offends you , know that i put my trust in god , so agree on your course of action , along with your partner-gods , and let no hesitation deflect you from it , then put it into effect against me , and give me no respite .
and when the pregnant she-camels shall be neglected ;
he asked his people : 'do you not fear ?
after it has become clear that they are condemned to the flaming fire , it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask for the forgiveness of those who associate others with allah in his divinity even if they be near of kin .
that is how god seals the hearts of those who do not know .
, say  yes , even if you become rocks , iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is disease were saying : allah and his apostle have promised us nought but delusion .
the weighing that day is true ; he whose scales are heavy -- they are the prosperers ,
so on us hath been justified the sentence of our lord : verily we are to taste .
he is god ; there is no god but he , the knower of the unknown and the known . he is the benevolent , ever-merciful .
, until when our command came and the oven overflowed , we said ,  load upon the ship of eachtwo mates and your family , except those about whom the word has preceded , andwhoever has believed .  but none had believed with him , except a few .
our lord suffer not our hearts to deviate after that thou hast guided us , and bestow from thine presence mercy . verily thou ! thou art the bestower !
god presents the example of a man who is a hired servant with no power over anything , and another on whom we have bestowed a handsome fortune , who spends from it in private and in public : can they be equal ? praised be god ! but most men do not understand .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best-acquainted with the things they utter .
and zechariah , when he called out to his lord , “ my lord , do not leave me alone , even though you are the best of heirs . ”
so , when the caravan set forth , their father said , 'surely i perceive joseph 's scent , unless you think me doting . '
and i shall respite them -- assuredly my guile is sure .
have they not realised that allah , who did not tire in creating the heavens and the earth and in creating them , is able to revive the dead ? surely yes , why not ? indeed he is able to do all things .
said those who were arrogant ,  indeed we , in that which you have believed , are disbelievers . 
said he , 'depart ! those of them that follow thee -- surely gehenna shall be your recompense , an ample recompense !
 and o ye in sin ! get ye apart this day !
surely he it is who originates and reproduces ,
we sent no messenger , but to be obeyed by allah 's leave . if they , when they had been unjust to themselves , had come to youand begged allah 's forgiveness , and the messenger had begged forgiveness for them : indeed , they would have found allah all-forgiving , most merciful .
 and if there is a party of you who believes in that with which i have been sent and a party who do not believe , so be patient until allah judges between us , and he is the best of judges . 
 the word changes not before me , and i do not the least injustice to my servants . 
your lord is the forgiver , possessor of mercy . were he to call them to account for what they have earned , he would have hastened the punishment for them . but they have an appointment from which they will find no escape .
they are condemned in this world and in the life to come . evil is the gift and the recipient !
and whoever of you have not the means wherewith to wed free , believing women , they may wed believing girls from among thosewhom your right hands possess , and allah has full knowledge about your faith , you are one from another . wed them with the permission of their own folkand give them their mahr according to what is reasonable ; theyshould be chaste , not adulterous , nor taking boy-friends . and after they have been taken in wedlock , if they commit illegal sexual intercourse , their punishment is half that for freewomen . this is for him among you who is afraid of being harmed in his religion or in his body ; but it is better for you that you practise self-restraint , and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
not so ; for we have created them of what they know .
then when he delivereth them . they forthwith rebel in the earth without justice . o ye ! your rebellion is only against yourselves : a brief enjoyment of the life of the world ; thereafter unto us is your return ; then we will declare unto you that which ye have been working .
and if any believe not in allah and his messenger , we have prepared , for those who reject allah , a blazing fire !
he said :  my lord ! give me victory over the people who are mufsidun .
god replied ,  after a very short time they will certainly regret for their deeds . 
except ,  if allah wills .  and remember your lord when you forgetand say ,  perhaps my lord will guide me to what is nearer than this to right conduct . 
do not , like the woman who unravels her yarn after its strands have been firmly spun , use your oaths as a means of deceiving one another , just because one community could become bigger than another . god is only testing you by means of this . on the day of resurrection he will make it clear to you what you differed about .
and the mountains will become like dyed tufts of wool ,
“ o my son ! keep the prayer established , and enjoin goodness and forbid from evil , and be patient upon the calamity that befalls you ; indeed these are acts of great courage . ”
and those who keep their trusts and covenants ;
have they not pondered over the word of god ? has something come to them that did not come to their forefathers ?
those who disbelieve in allah and his apostles and seek to separate allah from his apostles , and say , ‘ we believe in some and disbelieve in some ’ and seek to take a way in between
andwhen your lord proclaimed , 'if you are grateful , i will surely increase you ; but if you deny , indeed , my punishment is severe . ' 
this too is a blessed message that we revealed . are you going to deny it ?
nay , but he brought the truth , and he confirmed those sent .
he it is who hath revealed unto theethe scripture wherein are clear revelations - they are the substance of the book - and othersallegorical . but those in whose hearts is doubt pursue , forsooth , that which is allegorical seekingdissension by seeking to explain it . none knoweth its explanation save allah . and those who are of sound instruction say : we believe therein ; the whole is from our lord ; but only men of understanding really heed .
of those who split up their religion and became sects , each band in that which is with them exulting .
and when the mountains shall be made to pass away ,
so they returned with a mighty favour and a great bounty from allah having suffered no harm . they followed the good pleasure of allah , and allah is the lord of great bounty .
on that day she will tell out the tidings thereof .
these—their dwelling is the fire—on account of what they used to do .
whatever good they do shall not go unappreciated , and allah fully knows those who are pious .
at daybreak they called to each other :
and whatever of misfortune befalls you , it is because of what your hands have earned . and he pardons much . .
the day the punishment comes upon them from above and underneath their feet , say :  and now taste of what you had done . 
but those who strive against our versesto cause failure - for them will be a painful punishment of foul nature .
verily those who annoy allah and his apostle , -- allah hath cursed them in the world and the hereafter , and hath gotten ready for them a torment ignominious .
assuredly god is my lord and your lord ; therefore serve him ; this is a straight path . '
hold on firmly together to the rope of god , and be not divided among yourselves , and remember the favours god bestowed on you when you were one another 's foe and he reconciled your hearts , and you turned into brethren through his grace . you had stood on the edge of a pit of fire and he saved you from it , thus revealing to you his clear signs that you may find the right way perchance .
so allah gave them the reward of this world and the fair reward of the hereafter ; and allah loves the virtuous .
fie upon you and upon all that you worship beside allah . do you have no sense ? 
they are those from whom we accept the very best of what they have done , and overlook their faults . they will be among the inmates of paradise : a true promise they have been made .
and of them are those who vex the prophet and say : he is only a hearer . say : a hearer of good for you , who believeth in allah and is true to the believers , and a mercy for such of you as believe . those who vex the messenger of allah , for them there is a painful doom .
and he has taught him the explanation .
so establish weight with justice and fall not short in the balance .
imagining that there will befall them a waiste-breaking calomity .
and had we willed , we could have disfigured their faces while they were in their homes , therefore unable to go forward or turn back .
 there has already been for you a sign in the two armies that met : one was fighting in the cause of allah , the other resisting allah ; these saw with their own eyes twice their number . but allah doth support with his aid whom he pleaseth . in this is a warning for such as have eyes to see . 
thus we appointed you a midmost nation that you might be witnesses to the people , and that the messenger might be a witness to you ; and we did not appoint the direction thou wast facing , except that we might know who followed the messenger from him who turned on his heels -- though it were a grave thing save for those whom god has guided ; but god would never leave your faith to waste - truly , god is all-gentle with the people , all-compassionate .
our lord ! surely whomsoever thou makest enter the fire , him thou hast indeed brought to disgrace , and there shall be no helpers for the unjust :
and if a whisper from the devil reach theethen seek refuge in allah . lo ! he is the hearer , the knower .
then after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his elite , but they wronged them . so observe how was the fate of the agents of corruption !
they shall taste in it no coolness , nor any pleasant drink
say , ‘ who is the lord of the seven heavens and the lord of the great throne ? ’
affording neither shade , nor protection from the flames ,
leaving aside those whom allah has created for you as your mates . nay , you are a people that has transgressed all limits . 
does he not know , - when that which is in the graves is scattered abroad
they said , 'swear you , one to another , by god ,  we will attack him and his family by night , then we will tell his protector , we were not witnesses of the destruction of his family ; and assuredly we are truthful men .  '
say ,  o people of the scripture , do you resent us exceptthat we have believed in allah and what was revealed to us and what was revealed before and because most of you are defiantly disobedient ? 
but those who believe , and do deeds of righteousness -- the gardens . of paradise shall be their hospitality ,
and shouldst thou bring unto those who are vouchsafed the book every sign , they would not follow thy qiblah , neither art thou to be a follower of their qiblah ; nor doth one part of them follow the qiblah of the other . and shouldst thou follow their desires , after that which hath come unto thee of the knowledge , then verily thou wilt become one of the wrong-doers .
satan only seeketh to breed animosity and spites among you by means of wine and gambling and would keep you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer ; will ye not then desist ?
and approach each other with questions ,
and for you is half of what your wives leave if they have no child . but if they have a child , for you is one fourth of what they leave , after any bequest theymade or debt . and for the wives is one fourth if you leave no child . but if you leave a child , then for them is an eighth of what you leave , after any bequest youmade or debt . and if a man or woman leaves neither ascendants nor descendants but has a brother or a sister , then for each one of them is a sixth . but if they are more than two , they share a third , after any bequest which was made or debt , as long as there is no detriment .an ordinance from allah , and allah is knowing and forbearing .
say :  o people of the book ! do ye disapprove of us for no other reason than that we believe in allah , and the revelation that hath come to us and that which came before , andthat most of you are rebellious and disobedient ? 
why do you not speak ? ’
and before them , we destroyed the people of nooh ; they were indeed a sinning nation .
or is it that they have partners in worship ? so they should bring their appointed partners , if they are truthful .
then we afflicted them with a great flood and locusts , and the lice , and the frogs , and the blood . all these were distinct signs and yet they remained haughty . they were a wicked people .
whoever should hope for the meeting with allah - indeed , the term decreed by allah is coming . and he is the hearing , the knowing .
save in regard to their spouses and those whom their right hands own : so they are not blameworthy-
has there not reached them the news of those before them - the people of noah and'aad and thamud and the people of abraham and the companions of madyan and the towns overturned ? their messengers came to them with clear proofs . and allah would never have wronged them , but they were wronging themselves .
he said ,  my lord , grant me a sign !  he said ,  your sign will be that you will not speak to anyone for three successive days and nights , although sound in body . 
how many living things there are on the earth that do not store their food ; god provides them as well as you . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
 and i seek refuge with thee o my lord ! lest they should come near me . 
indeed , for those who fearedis a secure place
o wives of the prophet ! whosoever among you commit a flagrant indecency , for her the punishment shall be doubled , that is easy for allah .
take heed of the day when no man will be useful to man in the least , when no intercession matter nor ransom avail , nor help reach them .
it has been revealed to us that punishment shall overtake him who rejects it and turns away ! ' 
what expect they save the like of the days of those who passed away before them ? say : expect then ! i am with you among the expectant .
can they remain secure against the plan of god ? only they feel secure against the plan of god who are certain of being ruined .
and indeed , your lord - he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
call to the way of your lord with wisdom and fair exhortation and reason with them in a way that is best . your lord knows best those who have strayed away from his path , and he knows best those who are rightly guided .
surely in this is a sign , but most of them are not believers .
o believers , when believing women come to you as emigrants , test them . god knows very well their belief . then , if you know them to be believers , return them not to the unbelievers . they are not permitted to the unbelievers , nor are the unbelievers permitted to them . give the unbelievers what they have expended ; and there is no fault in you to marry them when you have given them their wages . do not hold fast to the ties of unbelieving women , and ask what you have expended , and let them ask what they have expended . that is god 's judgment ; he judges between you ; and god is all-knowing , all-wise .
if they call you a liar , so had those before them called their apostles liars , who had come to them with clear proofs , scriptures and the splendent book .
there they shall not hear any idle talk , or any untruth :
would that you could see the wrongdoers when they lower their heads before their lord ! they will say : 'our lord , we have now seen and heard . send us back and we will do righteous deeds , we are certain '
remember your lord deep within yourselves , humbly and privately - instead of shouting out loud -in the mornings and evenings and do not be of the heedless ones .
your lord keeps an eye on .
lawful to you is the pursuit of water-game and its use for food , - for the benefit of yourselves and those who travel ; but forbidden is the pursuit of land-game ; - as long as ye are in the sacred precincts or in pilgrim garb . and fear allah , to whom ye shall be gathered back .
they will be served with silver dishes and crystal clear goblets .
they say ,  when we are lost in the earth , how can we then be recreated ?  indeed , they deny they will ever meet their lord .
there is but one shout , and lo ! they behold ,
but if at the time of division other relatives , or orphans or poor , are present , feed them out of the , and speak to them words of kindness and justice .
indeed , the cautious shall live amid gardens and a river ,
and when our messengers brought abraham the glad tidings they said : 'we are destroying the people of this village , because its people are harmdoers '
we divided the descendants of israel into twelve tribes and told moses to strike the rock with his staff to let twelve fountains gush out therefrom ; his people had asked him to supply them with water . the twelve flowing springs were divided among themand each tribe knew its drinking place well . we provided them with shade from the clouds , sent down manna and quails to them for food , and told them to eat the pure things which we had given them . they did not do injustice to us but they wronged themselves .
and if one of them hath tidings of that which he likeneth to the beneficent one , his countenance becometh black and he is full of inward rage .
the companions of the right hand , - what will be the companions of the right hand ?
and not say ,  the book was only sent down to the two groups before us and we were indeed unaware of their teachings , 
so , whoever wills , will remember it .
and he answereth those who believe and work righteous works and increaseth unto them of his grace . and the infidels ! theirs shall be a severe torment .
is the description of paradise , which the righteous are promised , wherein are rivers of water unaltered , rivers of milk the taste of which never changes , rivers of wine delicious to those who drink , and rivers of purified honey , in which they will have from allfruits and forgiveness from their lord , likethose who abide eternally in the fire and are given to drink scalding water that will sever their intestines ?
o messenger ! deliver what has been revealed to you from your lord , for if you fail to do that , you have not fulfilled the task of his messengership . allah will certainly protect you from the evil of men . surely allah will not guide the unbelievers .
they say :  our lord ! hasten to us qittanabefore the day of reckoning ! 
follow what has been revealed to you from your lord and do not follow guardians besides him , how little do you mind .
and when the people are gathered , theywill be enemies to them , and they will be deniers of their worship .
do you suppose that you will enter paradise though there has not yet come to you the like ofthose who went before you ? stress and distress befell them and they were convulsed until the apostle and the faithful who were with him said , ‘ when will allah ’ s help ? ’ behold ! allah ’ s help is indeed near !
andwhen we took from the prophets their covenant , and from you , and from nuh , ibrahim , musa , and 'iesa , son of maryam . we took from them a strong covenant .
and when those who believe in our signs come unto them , say thou : peace be on you ; your lord hath prescribed mercy for himself ; so that whosoever of you doeth an evil through ignorance , then repenteth thereafter and amendeth , then verily he is forgiving , merciful .
that they may understand my speech ,
when your lord commanded the angels , saying ,  i am with you , so make those who believe stand firm . i will instill fear in the hearts of those who deny the truth : so strike their necks and strike all their finger joints ! 
it is we who sent down the book to youwith the truth , so worship god with your total devotion :
say : 'praise belongs to allah and peace be upon his worshipers whom he has chosen ' who is more worthier , allah or that which they associate !
and by the creation of the male and the female .
we made it an ordeal for the unjust .
and those that lift and bear away heavy weights ;
and the mighty pharaoh
so verily , with the hardship , there is relief ,
when the fire is set ablaze .
so when he had brainwashed his people , they followed him ; indeed they were a disobedient nation .
through boiling water , and then burnt in the fire .
and meat of birds that they may wish .
and warn therewith those who fear they shall be mustered to their lord ; they have , apart from god , no protector and no intercessor ; haply they will be godfearing .
indeed those whom youworship besides allah are slaves like you – so call them and they may answer you , if you are truthful !
abraham wasa nation , obedient to allah , of pure faith and was not among the idolaters ,
hesaid :  did i not tell you , that you would not be able to have patience with me ? 
andnoah , when he supplicated to us , we answered him , and we saved him and his nation from great distress ,
say : it is only revealed to me that your allah is one allah ; will you then submit ?
those who pervert our signs are not hidden from us . is he who will be cast into the fire better , or he who comes secure on the day of resurrection ? do as you wish ; he sees all what you do .
o man , having striven hard towards your lord , you shall meet him :
when they despaired of moving him , they conferred privily apart . said the eldest of them , 'do you not know how your father has taken a solemn pledge from you by god , and aforetime you failed regarding joseph ? never will i quit this land , until my father gives me leave , or god judges in my favour ; he is the best of judges .
god will not call you to account for that which is senseless in your oaths , but only for what is in your hearts ; for god is forgiving and forbearing .
they had rejected it before , while they indulged in conjectures from far away .
in the abode of truthfulness with an omnipotent king .
it is god who gives life and causes things to die . to him you will all return .
and say :  praise be to allah , who will soon show you his signs , so that ye shall know them  ; and thy lord is not unmindful of all that ye do .
say ,  whether you give willingly or unwillingly , your offerings shall not be accepted by god , for you are indeed a disobedient people . 
except the saying , “ peace , peace . ”
about which of the bounties of your lord can they persistently dispute ?
say to those who remained behind of the bedouins ,  you will be called toa people of great military might ; you may fight them , or they will submit . so if you obey , allah will give you a good reward ; but if you turn away as you turned away before , he will punish you with a painful punishment . 
indeed they were near to startling thee from the land , to expel thee from it , and then they would have tarried after thee only a little --
and allah has made for you wives of your own kind , and has made for you , from your wives , sons and grandsons , and has bestowed on you good provision . do they then believe in false deities and deny the favour of allah .
in it we prescribed for them : a life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , and an ear for an ear , a tooth for a tooth , and retaliation for wounds . yet whoever remits it out of charity , that shall be an atonement for him . those who do not judge by what allah has sent down—it is they who are the wrongdoers .
alif . lam . mim .
they said , 'put him and his brother off a while , and send among the cities musterers ,
and who , when they have committed an indecency or have wronged their souls , remember god and pray that their sins be forgiven , for who but god can forgive sins ? , and do not knowingly persist in their misdeeds ,
we drowned all the others .
is it pagan laws that they wish to be judged by ? who is a better judge than allah for a nation whose belief is firm ?
did he not find thee an orphan and give thee shelter ?
those who expend their wealth night and day , secretly and in public , their wage awaits them with their lord , and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
we would sit there on seats to hear ; but any listening now finds a meteor in wait for him .
verily , there is for you by day prolonged occupation with ordinary duties ,
those who lie in wait for you : if you attain victory from god , they say , “ were we not with you ? ” but if the disbelievers get a turn , they say , “ did we not side with you , and defend you from the believers ? ” god will judge between you on the day of resurrection ; and god will give the disbelievers no means of overcoming the believers .
allah said :  here is the path that leads straight to me .
and what though ye be slain in allah 's way or die therein ? surely pardon from allah and mercy are better than all that they amass .
so be patient . verily , the promise of allah is true , and let not those who have no certainty of faith , discourage you from conveying allah 's message
its seal is musk , for this let the competitors compete ;
there are other benefits for them therein , and drinks . will they not then give thanks ?
o believers , fear god , and seek the means to come to him , and struggle in his way ; haply you will prosper .
shall be food for the sinners :
then we destroyed the rest of them ,
they said :  surely you are still in your same old craze . 
had it been invaded from its sides , and they were asked to dissent , they would have done so with little hesitation .
and we left for the twain among the posterity :
and if we willed we could withdraw that which we have revealed unto thee , then wouldst thou find no guardian for thee against us in respect thereof .
the called upon .
the birth pangs brought her to the trunk of a date palm . she said , ‘ i wish i had died before this and become a forgotten thing , beyond recall . ’
they believe not therein , though the example of the men of old hath gone before .
what is the matter with you ? how judge ye ?
zachariah and john we guided , and guided jesus and elias who were all among the upright .
say to them ,  you will not be called to account for our sins and we shall not be called to account for what you do . 
confound not the truth with falsehood nor conceal it knowingly .
by the manifest book .
put your trust in the one who is the ever-living , who never dies , and glorify him with his praise . he is fully aware of the sins of his servants ;
and when our scourge fell upon them their only cry was : 'we are indeed transgressors . '
go , you and your brother , with my signs , and do not neglect my remembrance .
and the moon will be eclipsed .
who are active in deeds of charity ;
he said :  do ye then see whom ye have been worshipping , -
when he had supplied their provisions , he said to them :  bring yourbrother with you . have you not seen that i have given full measure , and that i am the best of hosts ?
and when the sky is stripped away
it was revealed to us that the punishment falls upon him who disbelieves and turns away . ' “
except his wife , of whom we had decreed that she should be of those who stay behind .
as if they had never prospered therein . indeed , thamood rejected their lord , so away with thamood .
if you will not give up the unlawful interest which you demand , know that you are in the state of war with god and his messenger . but if you repent , you will have your capital without being wronged or having done wrong to others .
and yet he desires that i should add more !
lord , you have knowledge of all that we hide and all that we reveal : nothing in heaven or on earth is hidden from god .
so he turned away from them , saying ,  my people , i delivered my lord 's messages to you and gave you sincere advice , so why should i grieve for people who refused to believe ? 
and the king said : bring him unto me that i may attach him to my person . and when he had talked with him he said : lo ! thou art to-day in our presence established and trusted .
among his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate to the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah , who created them , if it is him ye wish to serve .
nay ! by the moon
the son replied :  i will betake myself to a mountain , it will save me from the water .  nuhsaid :  this day there is no saviourfrom the decree of allah except him on whom he has mercy .  and a wave came in between them , so hewas among the drowned .
and if they are bent on divorce , god hears all and knows everything .
between them is a barrier , which they do not overrun .
the day we shall strike with the most terrible striking , we will indeed take vengeance .
and a large group from the latter .
their sides leave off the couches calling upon their lord in fear and in desire , and of that wherewith we have provided them they expend .
the way we have sent to you a noble messenger from among you , who recites to you our verses and purifies you , and teaches you the book and sound wisdom * , and teaches you what you did not know . .
but weigh things equitably and skimp not in the balance .
we did not destroy any town but that it had a known term .
o you who have disbelieved , make no excuses that day . you will only be recompensed for what you used to do .
for god your creation and your resurrection are only like the creation and resurrection of one soul . god is all-hearing and all-seeing .
do not sell the covenant of allah for a trifling price . what is with allah is better for you if you but knew .
those who rejected the truth will bear the burden of that rejection , and those who did good deeds will have made good provision for themselves .
upon the day when man shall remember what he has striven ,
that the blind man came to him .
go forth , light-armed and heavy-armed , and strive with your wealth and your lives in the way of allah ! that is best for you if ye but knew .
and urge not on the feeding of the poor .
god is the creator of all things , and he is the guarantor of all things .
and has placed the moon therein , an illumination , and has placed the sun , a lighted lamp ?
then they will not be able to think of any reply , nor will they be able to ask one another .
who took their religion as a sport and a play and whom the life of the world beguiled . so today we will forget them even as they forget the meeting of this their day and as they were ever gainsaying our signs .
and indeed we kept cycles of water among them that they may remember ; so most men did not accept , except to be ungrateful .
the day when no soul will avail another soul anything ; and the decision on that day is god ’ s .
‘ when you , and those who are with you , are settled in the ark , say , ‘ ‘ all praise belongs to allah , who has delivered us from the wrongdoing lot . ’ ’
when joseph said ,  father , in my dream i saw eleven stars , the sun and the moon prostrating before me , 
all these apostles of good news and admonition were sent so that after the apostles men may have no argument against god . god is all-powerful and all-wise .
so go you both to pharaoh , and say ,  we are the messengers of thy lord , so send forth with us the children of israel and chastise them not ; we have brought thee a sign from thy lord ; and peace be upon him who follows the guidance !
there was a token for you in two hosts which met : one army fighting in the way of allah , and another disbelieving , whom they saw as twice their number , clearly , with their very eyes . thus allah strengtheneth with his succour whom he will . lo ! herein verily is a lesson for those who have eyes .
when the disciples said : 'ojesus , son of mary , can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ' he replied : 'have fear of allah , if you are believers '
o believers , when proclamation is made for prayer on the day of congregation , hasten to god 's remembrance and leave trafficking aside ; that is better for you , did you but know .
 then why are not gold bracelets bestowed on him , orcomewith him angels accompanying him in procession ? 
those who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the messenger of allah , and were averse to striving with their wealth and their lives in allah 's way . and they said : go not forth in the heat ! say : the fire of hell is more intense of heat , if they but understood .
if all the trees on earth were pens , and the seaink , with sevenseas added to it , the words of god would not be exhausted : for , truly , god is almighty and wise .
or , they are like darkness upon a deep sea covered with a wave above which is another wave , above which are clouds , darkness piled one upon the other ; when he stretches out his hand he can scarcely see it . indeed , to whomsoever allah assigns no light , he shall have no light .
except those who reach a people between whom and you there is an alliance , or who come to you , their hearts shrinking from fighting you or fighting their own people ; and if allah had pleased , he would have given them power over you , so that they should have certainly fought you ; therefore if they withdraw from you and do not fight you and offer you peace , then allah has not given you a way against them .
and they were ordered only to worship allah , believing purely in him – devoted solely , and to establish the prayer and to pay the obligatory charity – and this is the straight religion .
that was because they disbelieved their messengers when they came to them with clear signs , and so allah seized them . surely , he is strong , and stern in retribution .
your lord knows you very well ; if he will , he will have mercy on you , or , if he will , he will chastise you . we sent thee not to be a guardian over them .
think they not that they will be resurrected ,
so we answered him , and we delivered him from the distress , and thus do we deliver the believers .
and give the kinsman his right , and the needy , and the traveller ; and never squander ;
and has it not been a sign to them that it is recognized by the scholars of the children of israel ?
abraham said :  what then is the business on which ye , o ye messengers ? 
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the people who do not expect to meet us say , “ bring a qur ’ an other than this one , or change it ” ; say , “ i do not have the right to change it on my own ; i only follow what is divinely revealed to me ; if i were to disobey my lord * , then i fear the punishment of the great day .
and sweet-smelling plants .
when at last the messengers lost all hope of achieving success in their task and thought that everyone had called them liars , we gave them victory and saved whomever we chose to save . the guilty ones can not escape our wrath .
when we show our favours to man he moves away and turns aside ; but when in trouble he prays a great deal .
until the inevitable endovertook us . 
the day he will call out to them and ask , ‘ where are my ‘ partners ’ that you used to claim ? ’
till , when they come , he will say :  did you deny my ayatwhen you comprehended them not in knowledge , or whatwas it that you used to do ? 
and cause not corruption upon the earth after its reformation . and invoke him in fear and aspiration . indeed , the mercy of allah is near to the doers of good .
we give to them a little enjoyment for awhile , and then will compel them to a tremendous punishment .
their greeting on the day they shall meet him will be  salam : peace !  and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you seen he who has taken as his god hisdesire , and allah has sent him astray due to knowledge and has set a seal upon his hearing and his heart and put over his vision a veil ? so who will guide him after allah ? then will you not be reminded ?
and indeed he did see the spectacle again .
have no other purpose except to help them in acquiring material benefits ? no indeed . but they do not understand .
, do you not see that all those who are in the heavens and on earth praise god , as do the birds with wings outstretched ? each knows his own mode of prayer and glorification : god has full knowledge of all that they do .
that was indeed a trying test .
that we may show you some of our great signs .
and to sulaiman the wind strongly raging , running by his command towards the land which we had blessed . and of everything we are the all-knower .
we gave moses and aaron the salvation and a radiance , and a remembrance for the godfearing
andwe have guarded them from every cursed devil :
he said :  our lord is he who gave everything its form and then guided it . 
the lord will say to them ,  join the group of jinn and people who lived before you , in hell .  each group , on entering hell , will curse the other dwellers , until all of them are brought together therein . the last group will accuse the first saying ,  lord , they made us go astray . therefore , double their torment in the fire .  the lord will reply ,  for everyone of you there is a double torment , but you do not know it  .
had we pleased we could have shown them to you that you could know them by their marks , and recognise them from the way they twist their words . yet god knows all your deeds .
and stay in your houses , and do not display yourselves like that of the times of ignorance , and perform as-salat , and give zakat and obey allah and his messenger . allah wishes only to remove arrijsfrom you , o members of the family , and to purify you with a thorough purification .
indeed , the qur'an is a decisive statement ,
when your children have reached the age of puberty , they should similarly ask your leaveas others did before them . god thus clearly explains his commands to you , for god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and it was said , “ woe to those bondmen – whenever a noble messenger comes to them , they mock at him ! ”
if allah helps you , none can overcome you . if he forsakes you , who then can help you after him ? therefore , in allah let the believers put all their trust .
,  now , they have given the lie to all your assertions , and you can neither ward offnor obtain any help .  for , whoever of you has committed evil , shall be caused by us to taste great suffering ! 
“ for you are many fruits in it , for you to eat therefrom . ”
these are tidings of the hidden , which we secretly reveal to you ; and you were not present with them when they threw their pens to draw lots , to know who should be the guardian of maryam ; nor were you present with them when they were quarrelling .
surely your lord -- he best knows who goes astray from his way , and he best knows those who follow the right course .
that no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another
provision for you and your cattle .
and tested them with it . and whosoever turns away from his lord 's remembrance , he will hurl him into a stern punishment .
those who suppress the proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have clarified them to humanity in the scripture—those—god curses them , and the cursers curse them .
and it is not the speech of a poet . little is the faith that you have !
blessed be he who sent down the criterionto his slavethat he may be a warner to the 'alamin .
guard all your prayers , and the middle prayer ; and stand with reverence before allah .
and have created for them of the like thereof whereon they ride .
say :  i know not whetherwhich you are promised is near or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
some of those who have divided their religion into different sects are not your concern . their affairs are in the hands of god who will show them all that they have done .
in the gardens of delight ,
save that of hell wherein they will abide . and that is easy for allah .
he smiled and laughed at her words , and said , “ my lord , direct me to be thankful for the blessings you have bestowed upon me and upon my parents , and to do good works that please you . and admit me , by your grace , into the company of your virtuous servants . ”
to god belongs what is in the heavens and what is on earth , and god encompasses everything .
surely the angels will come down to those who say , 'our lord is god ' and then remain steadfast , saying :  you should have neither fear nor regret , but rejoice in the happy news of paradise that has been promised you .
he will be judged with an easy account
and these who say : our lord ! avert from us the torment of hell verily the torment thereof is perishment .
- ah , what will tell thee what the morning star is !
but it will be avoided by those most unfortunate ones ,
there are some who worship god half-heartedly , then , if some good befalls them , they are content with it , but if an ordeal befalls them , they revert to their former ways . they lose in this world as well in the hereafter . that is a clear loss .
we shall surely ease him to the hardship ;
and as for those who came after them , they say , 'our lord , forgive us and our brothers , who preceded us in belief , and put thou not into our hearts any rancour towards those who believe . our lord , surely thou art the all-gentle , the all-compassionate . '
yet when good came their way they said :  it is our due ;  but when misfortune befell them they put the omen down to moses and those who were with him . but surely the omen was with god , yet most of them did not understand .
do they not see that we have created for them from what our hands have made , grazing livestock , andthey are their owners ?
and the heart of the mother of moses became void , and she would have betrayed him if we had not fortified her heart , that she might be of the believers .
and by the promised day ;
we stretched the earth and placed upon it firm stabilisers , and made all things grow upon it balanced evenly .
when our signs are rehearsed to such a one , he turns away in arrogance , as if he heard them not , as if there were deafness in both his ears : announce to him a grievous penalty .
and on the sky , how it is raised aloft ,
none but the unbelievers dispute concerning the verses of allah . so do not be deluded by their going to and fro in the land .
say : though the sea became ink for the words of my lord , verily the sea would be used up before the words of my lord were exhausted , even though we brought the like thereof to help .
lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
he will say , “ if only i had forwarded for my life . ”
a guidance and good tidings for the believers ,
indeed , to our lord we are turning '
and that he shall then be fully recompensed ,
and to thamood we sent their brother salih . he said : 'worship allah , my nation , for you have no god except he . a clear proof has come to you from your lord . here is the shecamel of allah , a sign for you . leave her to graze in the earth of allah and do not touch her with evil , lest a painful punishment seizes you .
those who established a community center and embraced the faith before the arrival of the immigrants love those who have come to their town . they are not jealous of what is given to the immigrants . they give preference to them over themselves - even concerning the things that they themselves urgently need . whoever controls his greed will have everlasting happiness .
why would god guide a people who disbelieves after having had faith , who have found the messenger to be truthful , and who have received authoritative evidence ? god does not guide the unjust .
that is the sure day . whosoever therefore willeth , let him betake unto his lord a resort .
except those who join a group , between you and whom there is a treaty , or those who approach you with their breasts restraining from fighting you as well as fighting their own people . had allah willed , indeed he would have given them power over you , and they would have fought you . so if they withdraw from you , and fight not against you , and offer you peace , then allah has opened no way for you against them .
and his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
never think that the disbelievers are causing failureupon the earth . their refuge will be the fire - and how wretched the destination .
and you will see every group down on its knees ; every group will be called towards its book of deeds ; “ this day you will be repaid for what you did . ”
so that allah will turn off from themthe worst in their deeds and give them their reward according to the best of what they have done .
when our revelations are conveyed to him , he says ,  fables of the ancients ! 
as to those who disbelieve , perdition lies in store for them and allah has reduced their works to nought .
and when the birthpangs came upon her by the trunk of a palmtree , she said : 'oh , would that i had died before this and become a thing forgotten '
and it moved on with them amidst waves like mountains . and nuh called out his son , and he was apart : o my son ! embark with us , and be not with the infidels .
and recall what time we took your bond , and raised over you the tur saying : hold fast to that which we have vouchsafed unto you , and remember that which is therein , that haply ye may become god-fearing .
o man ! what is it that lures you away from your bountiful sustainer ,
‘ did i not exhort you , o children of adam , saying , “ do not worship satan . he is indeed your manifest enemy .
and leave it as an empty plain ,
and he said : embark therein ; in the name of allah be its course and its anchorage , verily my lord is forgiving , merciful .
had they gene forth with you , they would have added unto you naught save unsoundness , and they would surely have hurried about in your midst seeking sedition unto you ; and amongst you there are listeners to them ; and allah is knower of the wrong-doers .
it is he who sends down clear verses to his worshiper , so that he brings you out of the darkness into the light . indeed , allah is the gentle , the most merciful to you .
or a little more ; and recite the quranin a slow , style .
not equal are those believers remaining- other than the disabled - and the mujahideen , in the cause of allah with their wealth and their lives . allah has preferred the mujahideen through their wealth and their lives over those who remain , by degrees . and to both allah has promised the best . but allah has preferred the mujahideen over those who remainwith a great reward -
whoever works righteousness , man or woman , and has faith , verily , to him will we give a new life , a life that is good and pure and we will bestow on such their reward according to the best of their actions .
surely lot warned his people that we shall seize them , but they doubted the warnings .
prophet , fight the unbelievers and hypocrites vehemently for the cause of god . their dwelling is hell , a terrible destination !
he supplied you with livestock and children .
he said , ‘ your lord , and the lord of your forefathers ! ’
they replied : ' o shu'ayb ! does your prayer enjoin upon you that we should forsake the deities whom our forefathers worshipped , or that we should give up using our wealth as we please ? do you fancy that you , and only you , are forbearing and right-directed ? '
it is god who subjugated the ocean for you so that ships may ply through it by his command , and you may seek his bounty , and may haply be grateful .
do they say : 'he has invented it ' no , they do not believe .
indeed allah took the covenant from the children of israel , and we appointed twelve leaders among them . and allah said :  i am with you if you perform as-salatand give zakat and believe in my messengers ; honour and assist them , and lend to allah a good loan . verily , i will remit your sins and admit you to gardens under which rivers flow . but if any of you after this , disbelieved , he has indeed gone astray from the straight path . 
say :  show me those whom you have joined to him as partners . nay ! but he is allah , the allmighty , the allwise . 
o you who believe ! when death approaches any of you , and you make a bequest , then take the testimony of two just men of your own folk or two others from outside , if you are travelling through the land and the calamity of death befalls you . detain them both after as-salat , if you are in doubt , let them both swear by allah :  we wish not for any worldly gain in this , even though hebe our near relative . we shall not hide testimony of allah , for then indeed we should be of the sinful . 
all that he claims will revert to us , and he will come before us all alone .
when he asked his father and his people ,  what is that which you worship ? 
should anyone argue with you concerning him , after the knowledge that has come to you , say , ‘ come ! let us call our sons and your sons , our women and your women , our souls and your souls , then let us pray earnestly , and call down allah ’ s curse upon the liars . ’
upon whom the punishment will come that will degrade him , and who will be overtaken by an everlasting punishment '
allah is he who created you and provided food for you , then he causeth you to die , and then he shall quicken you . is there any of your associate-gods that doth aught of that ? hallowed and exalted be he above that which they associate !
those of them with whom thou madest a treaty , and then at every opportunity they break their treaty , and they keep not duty .
so i fled from you when i feared you . then my lord granted me wisdom and prophethood and appointed meof the messengers .
they shall have what they will of their lord 's bounty . that is the reward of the good :
and never came an ayah from among the ayatof their lord to them , but they did turn away from it .
those who believe and do good works will be fully recompensed by him . and he will give them yet more out of his bounty ; and as for those who were disdainful and proud , he will punish them with a painful punishment . and they will not find anyone to help or protect them against god .
and a stream flowing through the middle of the gardens .
i swear by the angels who violently pull out the souls of the wicked ,
he does not utter a single word , without a ready recorder seated next to him .
just recall the time when your lord said to the angels ,  i am going to appoint a vicegerent on the earth .  they humbly enquired ,  are you going to appoint such a one as will cause disorder and shed blood on the earth ? we are already engaged in hymning your praise , and hallowing your name  .
o herald of the hidden ! we have indeed sent you as an observing present witness and a herald of glad tidings and warning .
the day will come when we raise up in every people a witness against them from amongst themselves , and we will bring you as a witness against these people . we have sent down the book to you to make everything clear , a guidance , and a mercy , and glad tidings for those who submit to god .
lot asked his people ,  do you understandably commit indecency ?
those are the ones who disbelieve in the verses of their lord and inmeeting him , so their deeds have become worthless ; and we will not assign to them on the day of resurrection any importance .
and what will show you what is the uphill task ?
and we rained down upon them a rain ; so behold thou , how was the end of the sinners !
and did he not find you in want , and then enriched you ?
for us , you can anticipate nothing other than paradise if we are killed or success if we triumph . however , what we can anticipate for you is either punishment by the hands of god or by ours . wait and we , too , are waiting with you .
he admits to his mercy whomsoever he pleases . as for the wrong-doers , he has prepared for them a grievous chastisement .
and when you said , ‘ o moses , ‘ we will not put up with one kind of food . so invoke your lord for us , so that he may bring forth for us of that which the earth grows—its greens and cucumbers , its garlic , lentils , and onions. ’ he said , ‘ do you seek to replace what is superior with that which is inferior ? go down to any town and you will indeed get what you ask for ! ’ so they were struck with abasement and poverty , and they earned allah ’ s wrath . that , because they would deny the signs of allah and kill the prophets unjustly . that , because they would disobey and commit transgressions .
therefore let them laugh little , and weep much , in recompense for what they have been earning .
they will say , ‘ indeed , aforetime , we used to be apprehensive about our families .
verily herein is a sign unto him who feareth the torment of the hereafter . that is a day whereon mankind shall be gathered together , and that is a day to be witnessed .
verily those who disbelieve from among the people of the book and the associaters shall be cast into the hell-fire , as abiders therein . these ! they are the worst of the creation .
with a flowing spring ,
ye are the best community that hath been raised up for mankind . ye enjoin right conduct and forbid indecency ; and ye believe in allah . and if the people of the scripture had believed it had been better for them . some of them are believers ; but most of them are evil-livers .
“ and do not appoint other deities along with allah ; indeed i am from him , a clear herald of warning towards you . ”
o you who believe ! when believing women come to you emigrating , test them . god is aware of their faith . and if you find them to be faithful , do not send them back to the unbelievers . they are not lawful for them , nor are they lawful for them . but give them what they have spent . you are not at fault if you marry them , provided you give them their compensation . and do not hold on to ties with unbelieving women , but demand what you have spent , and let them demand what they have spent . this is the rule of god ; he rules among you . god is knowing and wise .
“ no poor person is to enter it upon you today . ”
thereforewhomsoever allah intends that he would guide him aright , he expands his breast for islam , andwhomsoever he intends that he should cause him to err , he makes his breast strait and narrow as though he were ascending upwards ; thus does allah lay uncleanness on those who do not believe .
so that when at last we open up the gate of severe punishment on them they will be overwhelmed with despair .
except him who snatches off but once , then there follows him a brightly shining flame .
ah woe , that day ! to the rejecters of truth !
allah cites an example of the faithful : the wife of pharaoh , when she said , ‘ my lord ! build me a home near you in paradise , and deliver me from pharaoh and his conduct , and deliver me from the wrongdoing lot . ’
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , “ peace. ” he said , “ peace. ” soon after , he came with a roasted calf .
and they did not make any exception .
 no reason have we why we should not put our trust on allah . indeed he has guided us to the ways we . we shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may cause us . for those who put their trust should put their trust on allah . 
is not hewho guides you in the darkness of the land and the sea , and who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings , going before his mercy ? is there any ilahwith allah ? high exalted be allah above all that they associate as partners !
have they not regarded that whatever thing allah has created casts its shadow to the right and to the left , prostrating to allah in utter humility ?
and we inspired to the mother of moses ,  suckle him ; but when you fear for him , cast him into the river and do not fear and do not grieve . indeed , we will return him to you and will make himof the messengers . 
and it is he who made the night and day a succession for whom he desires to remember or he desires to be thankful .
be patient over what they say , and remember our servant , david , of strength . indeed he was a penitent .
who break the covenant of allah after the ratification thereof , and sunder that which allah hath commanded should be joined , and act corruptly on the earth . these ! they are the losers .
and the mountains shall be like plucked wool-tufts .
ah the woe that day for those who deny ,
and those who believe in allah and his apostles and do not make a distinction between any of them -- allah will grant them their rewards ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they said ] :  whatever ayatyou may bring to us , to work therewith your sorcery on us , we shall never believe in you . 
by thethat scatter broadcast ;
in what your wives leave , your share is a half , if they leave no child ; but if they leave a child , ye get a fourth ; after payment of legacies and debts . in what ye leave , their share is a fourth , if ye leave no child ; but if ye leave a child , they get an eighth ; after payment of legacies and debts . if the man or woman whose inheritance is in question , has left neither ascendants nor descendants , but has left a brother or a sister , each one of the two gets a sixth ; but if more than two , they share in a third ; after payment of legacies and debts ; so that no loss is caused . thus is it ordained by allah ; and allah is all-knowing , most forbearing .
delighting in what god has given them out of his grace , and happy for those who have not yet joined them ; that they have nothing to fear , nor will they grieve .
had i not the guidance of my lord , i would certainly have been brought into torment  .
they will be told ,  you and what you had worshipped instead of god will be the fuel of hell  .
“ the last day will surely come – it was close that i hide it from all – in order that every soul may get the reward of its effort . ”
he created the heavens and the earth with truth . exalted is he above what they associate !
said moosa , “ and what is your explanation , o samri ? ”
father ! i am indeed afraid that a punishment from the all-beneficent will befall you , and you will become satan ’ s accomplice . ’
there has certainly been for you in the messenger of allah an excellent pattern for anyone whose hope is in allah and the last day andremembers allah often .
say thou : o mine bondmen who believe ! fear your lord . for those who do good in this world there is good : and allah 's earth is spacious . verily the patient shall be paid in full their hire without reckoning .
and paradise will be brought close for the pious .
he said , “ we will soon strengthen your arm with your brother , and give you both dominance , so they will not be able to harm you ; due to our signs ; you both , and those who will follow you , will be victorious . ”
 instead of allah ? can they help you orhelp themselves ? 
woe to every sinful liar
and we left for himamong generationsin later times .
it is god who put the oceans at your disposal so that you could find therein fresh fish for food and ornaments with which to deck yourselves with . you will find ships that sail for you so that you may travel in search of the bounties of god and give him thanks .
 except thy servants amongst them , sincere and purified . 
indeed , those who disbelieve will be addressed ,  the hatred of allah for you wasgreater than your hatred of yourselveswhen you were invited to faith , but you refused . 
they are the ones who say :  do not spend on those who are with the apostle of god till they break away .  to god belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth ; but the hypocrites do not understand .
if you are among the believers and riseto lead the prayer for them , let a party of them stand with you to worship , keeping their arms . when they have performed their prostration , let them go behind you , and let another party who have not prayed , pray with you , remaining on guard and keeping their arms , for the unbelievers love to see you heedless of your arms and your baggage so that they might swoop upon you in a surprise attack . but there shall be no blame upon you if you were to lay aside your arms if you are either troubled by rain or are sick ; but remain on guard . surely allah has prepared a humiliating chastisement for the unbelievers .
whatever the excuses he may offer .
we created not the heavens , the earth , and all between them , but for just ends . and the hour is surely coming . so overlookwith gracious forgiveness .
 and sit not on every road , threatening , and hindering from the path of allah those who believe in him . and seeking to make it crooked . and remember when you were but few , and he multiplied you . and see what was the end of the mufsidun .
for surely if thou leave them they will lead astray thy servants , and will not beget any but immoral , ungrateful
who establish regular prayers and spendout of the gifts we have given them for sustenance :
on this day , they will have no friends
indeed those who took the calf – the punishment from their lord , and humiliation will reach them in the life of this world ; and this is the way we reward those who fabricate lies .
when they felt our punishment coming upon them , they began to flee from it .
they said :  alas for us ! we have indeed transgressed !
indeed , it is on a way which still exists .
man does not utter any word except that with him is an observer prepared .
to orphans restore their property , nor substituteworthless things forgood ones ; and devour not their substancewith your own . for this is indeed a great sin .
thou wast not upon the western side when we decreed to moses the commandment , nor wast thou of those witnessing ;
and that it is he who causes death and gives life
we have revealed to you the book in all truth so that you judge among people by the laws of god . however , never defend the treacherous ones .
 and o my people ! let not my shiqaqcause you to suffer the fate similar to that of the people of nuhor of hud or of salih , and the people of loutare not far off from you !
whatever matter you differ about , its judgment rests with god . “ such is god , my lord , in whom i trust , and unto him i repent . ”
they say , 'we will not believe thee till thou makest a spring to gush forth from the earth for us ,
and we have certainly made the qur'an easy for remembrance , so is there any who will remember ?
and who pay heed to their prayers .
that is from the news of the unseen which we reveal to you , . and you were not with them when they cast their pens as to which of them should be responsible for mary . nor were you with them when they disputed .
saying : ' o my lord , my bones are enfeebled , and my head glows silver with age . yet , never lord , have i been unblessed in prayer to you .
indeed , those who believe and do righteous deeds - for them are the gardens of pleasure .
and prevent the utensils of assistance .
among them are some who listen to you , but we have placed veils over their hearts and deafness in their ears which prevent them from understanding what you say . even if they saw all the signs , they would still not believe in them . when those who deny the truth come to dispute with you , they will say ,  this is nothing but ancient fables , 
this is god 's creation . show me then what those besides him have created ! the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
when he returns to us , he will say ,  would that there had been as long a distance between me and you as that between the east and west . what a terrible companion you have been  .
indeed your lord is the all-mighty , the all-merciful .
so we sent on them a furious wind in unlucky days , that we may make them taste the chastisement of abasement in this world 's life ; and certainly the chastisement of the hereafter is much more abasing , and they shall not be helped .
and also a lesson for you in the fruits of the date-palms and the grapes whereof ye take a liquor and a provision goodly ; verily therein is a sign far a people who understand .
the people who have rejected the message of truth , be they the people of the book or the mushriks , would never like that any good be sent down to you from your lord , but allah chooses for his mercy whom he wills , and allah is most bountiful .
he said : your prayer is heard . do ye twain keep to the straight path , and follow not the road of those who have no knowledge .
their garments will be of fine green silk , and gold embroidery . they will be adorned with bracelets of silver , and their lord will give them a pure drink .
but if they give by measure or by weight to them , they cause loss .
there is for them torment in the worldly life , but the torment of the hereafter is harsher . and they have no defender against god .
to allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth . verily we have directed the people of the book before you , and youto fear allah . but if ye deny him , lo ! unto allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth , and allah is free of all wants , worthy of all praise .
and do not waver , nor feel remorse . you are the superior ones , if you are believers .
when you do not bring them a verse , they say , 'why have you not chosen one ' say : ' i follow only what is revealed to me from my lord . thisis a veritable proof from your lord , guidance and mercy for people who believe '
 i seek refuge in the merciful from you , if you fear him ,  she said .
till the day of appointed time .
on a path that is straight , --
o my two fellow-prisoners ! as for one of you , he will pour out wine for his lord to drink ; and as for the other , he will be crucified so that the birds will eat from his head . thus is the case judged concerning which ye did inquire .
now , who else can have aversion to the way of abraham but the one who has debased himself with folly and ignorance ? abraham was the man whom we chose for our service in this world , and in the next world he shall be among the righteous .
and they disobeyed their lord 's apostle , so he laid hold of them with a grip increasing .
how many a beast does not bear its own provision . allah provides for it , asfor you . he is the hearer , the knower .
for abraham was forbearing , tender-hearted and oft-returning to god .
and that we sought to reach heaven , but we found it filled with strong guards and flaming stars .
there is no doubt that the quran is a guide .
they are the descendants one of another ; and allah is the all hearing , the all knowing .
o o ye who believe ! seek help in patience and prayer ; verily allah is with the patient .
, the bedouins who were left behind say to you : “ we were occupied with our goods and families . so ask forgiveness for us. ” they say with their tongues what is not in their hearts . say to them : “ who can be of any avail to you against allah if he should intend to cause you any harm or confer upon you any benefit ? ” allah is well aware of all that you do .
those are , in truth , the believers . they shall have degrees with their lord and forgiveness , and a generous provision .
hasten to forgiveness from your lord and to a garden the extensiveness of which is as the extensiveness of the heaven and the earth ; it is prepared for those who believe in allah and his apostles ; that is the grace of allah : he gives it to whom he pleases , and allah is the lord of mighty grace .
that they may bear their burdens entirely on the day of resurrection and also of the burdens of those whom they lead astray without knowledge ; now surely evil is what they bear .
when the stars fall , losing their lustre ;
and their prayer before the house is nothing but whistling and clapping of hands ; taste then the chastisement , for you disbelieved .
surely those who oppose god and his prophet will be among the vilest .
except those who believed and did good deeds – for them is a reward that will never end .
your lord is certainly the all-knowing creator .
and i do call to witness the self-reproaching spirit : .
it is indeed a miserable residence and destination . ”
on the day that we shall muster the godfearing to the all-merciful with pomp
it is god who sends forth the winds so that they raise up the clouds . we drive them to a dead land , and by them bring the earth to life after its death . such is the resurrection .
except only to a messenger that he has chosen , and he sends guardians before him and behind him ,
will have the abyss for abode .
when they entered upon david and he was alarmed by them ? they said ,  fear not.two adversaries , one of whom has wronged the other , so judge between us with truth and do not exceedand guide us to the sound path .
these shall have a share of what they have earned . swift is the reckoning of allah .
and be patient for the sake of your lord .
or he makes them of both sorts , male and female ; and he makes whom he pleases barren ; surely he is the knowing , the powerful .
and had we sent down unto thee a book written upon parchment so that they could have touched it with their hands , those who disbelieve would have said : this is naught but magic manifest .
surely , there are among you , he who lingers , then , if an affliction hits you , he would say : 'allah has favored me , that i was not a martyr with them '
the heavens are about to be rent apart at it , the earth to split open , and the mountains to collapse into bits ,
and that “ he – exalted be his majesty – has not taken to himself either a wife or a son ” ;
and when a certain nation of them said , 'why do you admonish a people god is about to destroy or to chastise with a terrible chastisement ? ' they said , 'as an excuse to your lord ; and haply they will be godfearing . '
you are certainly greater in being feared in their hearts than allah ; that is because they are a people who do not understand
and all of them shall surely be brought before us .
they are the ones who disbelieved , and barred you from the holy mosque and the offering , detained so as not to reach its place of sacrifice . if it had not been for certain men believers and certain women believers whom you knew not , lest you should trample them , and there befall you guilt unwittingly on their account , had they been separated clearly , then we would have chastised the unbelievers among them with a painful chastisement .
and indeed before them , most of the former people went astray .
verily allah is my lord and your lord : him therefore serve ye : this is a way that is straight .
and we gave the lie to the day of judgement
do you reckon the giving of water to pilgrims and the inhabiting of the holy mosque as the same as one who believes in god and the last day and struggles in the way of god ? not equal are they in god 's sight ; and god guides not the people of the evildoers .
by the winds sent forth with beneficence .
that is the commandment of allah which he revealeth unto you . and whoso keepeth his duty to allah , he will remit from him his evil deeds and magnify reward for him .
no indeed ! verily the deeds of the wicked are in the record locked up in the prison-house !
we had not done any injustice to them but they had wronged themselves .
say to them ,  you may believe in it or not . those to whom knowledge had been revealed , fall on their faces in prostration when it is recited ,
had we wished we would have given every soul its guidance , but my word became due : ‘ surely i will fill hell with all thejinn and humans . ’
those who are stingy , and induce people to be stingy . whoever turns away—god is the independent , the praiseworthy .
and praise be to god , the lord of the worlds .
socast his staff , and lo , it turned into a living serpent .
knows their meanings ] .
so thathave covered them up .
so i do call to witness the ruddy glow of sunset ;
the way of those on whom thou hast bestowed thy grace , those whoseis not wrath , and who go not astray .
o prophet ! god is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you .
we showed pharaoh all our signs but he rejected them and refused to believe in them .
pharaoh said : 'what ! do you believe before you have my permission ? surely this is a plot you have contrived to drive out the rulers from the capital . so you shall see ,
losers are they who slay their children in folly , without knowledge , and have forbidden what god has provided them , forging against god ; they have gone astray , and are not right-guided .
there is no blame on the weak nor on the sick nor on those who have nothing to enable them to joinif they stay behind provided that they are sincere to allah and to his messenger . there is no cause for reproach against those who do good . allah is all-forgiving , ever merciful .
have you not considered those who were given a share of the scripture , as they were called to the scripture of god to arbitrate between them ; then some of them turned back , and declined ?
this daygood foods have been made lawful , and the food of those who were given the scripture is lawful for you and your food is lawful for them . andchaste women from among the believers and chaste women from among those who were given the scripture before you , when you have given them their due compensation , desiring chastity , not unlawful sexual intercourse or takinglovers . and whoever denies the faith - his work has become worthless , and he , in the hereafter , will be among the losers .
those who have said that the messiah , son of mary , is god , have , in fact , committed themselves to disbelief . , ask them ,  who can prevent god from destroying the messiah , his mother and all that is in the earth ?  to god belongs all that is in the heavens , the earth , and all that is between them . god creates whatever he wants and he has power over all things .
and in everlasting shade .
did you not see those who proclaim their piety ? in fact allah purifies whomever he wills , and no injustice , even equal to the hair upon a date seed will be done to them .
is it they who distribute the mercy of your lord ? it is we who have distributed their livelihood among them in the life of this world , and have raised some above others in rank that some of them may harness others to their service . your lord 's mercy is better than all the treasures that they hoard .
and they will be presented before your lord in rows , ,  you have certainly come to us just as we created you the first time . but you claimed that we would never make for you an appointment . 
for them there will be a known provision .
he said : my lord ! forasmuch as thou hast favoured me , i will nevermore be a supporter of the guilty .
say , “ o people of the scripture , why do you hinder from god ’ s path those who believe , seeking to distort it , even though you are witnesses ? god is not unaware of what you do . ”
o prophet ! verily , we have sent you as witness , and a bearer of glad tidings , and a warner ,
and those who patiently seek the presence of their lord , and pray regularly , and spend from our provisions to them , secretly and openly , and repel evil with good . these will have the ultimate home .
if they say ,  he has invented it himself .  say ,  if you are truthful , produce ten invented chapters like it , and call on whom you can besides god , to help you . 
and roundly denied our signs as false .
but rather worship only allah , and be among the thankful !
my fellowprisoners , say which is better , many gods at variance , or allah the one , the conqueror ?
if any of you do not have the means to marry a chaste believing woman , marry your believing slave-girls . god knows best about your faith . you have the same faith . marry them with the permission of their masters and if they are chaste and have avoided fornication and amorous activities , give them their just dowries . if after marriage they commit adultery , they should receive half of the punishment of a free woman who has committed the same crime . this is for those who fear falling into evil . it is better for you to have self-control . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
that indeed is the absolute truth .
when you make up your mind to perform hajj and ` umrah , accomplish these to please allah . but if you are hemmed in somewhere , then offer to allah whatever sacrifice you can afford . and do not shave your heads until the sacrifice reaches its place . but whoever among you is sick or has an ailment of the head and has his head shaved shall atone for this either by fasting or by alms-giving or by offering a sacrifice however , when you are secure , whoever takes advantage of this opportunity to perform ` umrah shall offer the sacrifice that he can afford . but if he can not afford a sacrifice , he shall fast three days during the hajj season and seven days after reaching home , that is , ten days in all . this concession is only for those whose homes are not near the masjid haram , refrain from transgressing these commandments of allah and know it well that allah is very severe in punishment .
they worship one from whom harm is expected more than the benefit ; indeed what an evil master and indeed what an evil friend !
and the jews say : the christians do not follow anythingand the christians say : the jews do not follow anythingwhile they recite thebook . even thus say those who have no knowledge , like to what they say ; so allah shall judge between them on the day of resurrection in what they differ .
and barter not the covenant of allah for a small price ; verily that which is with allah -- that is better for you , if ye only know .
a little enjoyment – and for them is a punishment , most painful .
then we cause to grow therein the grain ,
the unbelievers have vehemently contended that they shall not be raised to life . say to them : “ yes , by my lord , you shall surely be raised to life , and you shall certainly be fully informed of all that you did . that is easy enough for allah . ”
then ye shall surely beholdwith the surety of vision .
and make the grain grow in it ,
say “ so do you instruct me to worshipother than allah ? you ignorant fools ! ”
and verily i am the most forgiving unto whomsoever repenteth and believeth and worketh righteously , and thereafter letteth himself remain guided .
say ,  have you considered if your water were to sink into the ground , who could then bring you flowing water ? 
so we revealed to him : ‘ build the ark before our eyes and by our revelation . when our edict comes and the oven gushes , bring into it a pair of every kind , and your family , except those of them against whom the decree has gone beforehand , and do not plead with me for those who are wrongdoers : they shall indeed be drowned . ’
they are the people of paradise , abiding in it forever ; the reward of their deeds .
and shown him the two paths ?
andwhen you killed a man and fell into dispute among yourselves as to the crime . but allah brought forth that which you were hiding .
god—there is no god but he , the lord of the sublime throne . ”
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; he creates what he wills . he gives to whom he wills female , and he gives to whom he wills males .
and if our revelations are recited unto them in plain terms , they say : this is naught else than a man who would turn you away from what your fathers used to worship ; and they say : this is naught else than an invented lie . those who disbelieve say of the truth when it reacheth them : this is naught else than mere magic .
they said : we broke not tryst with thee of our own will , but we were laden with burdens of ornaments of the folk , then cast them , for thus as-samiri proposed .
think not the unbelievers able to frustrate god in the earth ; their refuge is the fire -- an evil homecoming .
a kind word and forgiveness is better than charity followed by injury . allah is the clement .
gardens and vineyards .
can theywho rely on a clear prooffrom their lord , and whom a witness ] from him follows it ; and before it , came the book of musa , a guidance and a mercy , they believe therein , but those of the sectsthat reject it , the fire will be their promised meeting-place . so be not in doubt about it . verily , it is the truth from your lord , but most of the mankind believe not .
and we raised him to a high station .
covetous over you . then when fear comes , thou wilt see them looking to thee , their eyes revolving , likeone over whom hovers death : but when the fear is past , they will smite you with sharp tongues , covetous of goods . such men have no faith , and so allah has made their deeds of none effect : and that is easy for allah .
then we set you upon a pathway of faith , so follow it , and do not follow the inclinations of those who do not know .
these messengers : we gave some advantage over others . to some of them god spoke directly , and some he raised in rank . we gave jesus son of mary the clear miracles , and we strengthened him with the holy spirit . had god willed , those who succeeded them would not have fought one another , after the clear signs had come to them ; but they disputed ; some of them believed , and some of them disbelieved . had god willed , they would not have fought one another ; but god does whatever he desires .
and the dwellers of the grove and the people of tuba ; all rejected the apostles , so my threat came to pass .
and they say , “ if only a miracle was sent down to him from his lord. ” say , “ the realm of the unseen belongs to god ; so wait , i am waiting with you . ”
verily we have coined for mankind in this qur'an all kinds of similitudes ; and indeed if thou camest unto them with a miracle , those who disbelieve would verily exclaim : ye are but tricksters !
it is he who sends down water from the sky , and brings forth with it every kind of growing thing . then from it we bring forth vegetation from which we produce the grain , in clusters , and from the palm-tree , from the spathes of it , low-hanging clusters , and gardens of grapes , olives and pomegranates , similar and dissimilar . look at its fruit as it fructifies and ripens . indeed , there are signs in that for a people who have faith .
will you not make war on a people who broke their pledges and resolved to expel the apostle , and openedagainst you initially ? do you fear them ? but allah is worthier of being feared by you , should you be faithful .
and the fruits that they desire .
and they said ,  our hearts are wrapped .  but , , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little is it that they believe .
verily , he ] was one of our believing slaves .
it will not be in accordance with your desires , nor the desires of the people of the scripture . he who doeth wrong will have the recompense thereof , and will not find against allah any protecting friend or helper .
they planned , and god planned ; but god is the best of planners .
it is we who give life , and make to die , and to us is the homecoming .
“ and indeed yusuf came to you with clear signs before this , thereupon you remained doubtful concerning what he had brought ; to the extent that when he died , you said , ‘ allah will surely not send any noble messenger after him ’ ” ; this is how allah sends astray whoever transgresses , is doubtful . –
then he said to adam : 'tell them their names . ' and when adam had named them , he said : 'did i not tell you that i know the unseen of the heavens and earth , and all that you reveal and all that you hide '
those who pay the zakat ;
'our lord , i have settled some of my offspring in a barren valley near your holy house ; our lord , in order that they establish the prayer . make the hearts of people yearn towards them , and provide them with fruits , in order that they are thankful .
they will have no allies to help them against god ; there is no wayfor those whom god lets go astray .
and to whom i granted extensive wealth
and you become three classes .
read ! and your lord is the most generous ,
and satan had no control over them at all , except that we willed to reveal as to who believes in the hereafter and who is in doubt of it ; and your lord is a guardian over all things .
and when the unbelievers established in their hearts fierce bigotry , the fierce bigotry of ignorance , allah sent down his tranquility on his messenger and the believers and firmly fastened to them the word of 'taqwa'to which they have better right and are worthy of it . allah has knowledge of all things .
and do not be like those who left their homes boastfully , showing off before the people , and barring others from the path of god . god comprehends what they do .
and recall when allah took a covenant from the prophets : 'this is the book and the wisdom which i have given you . but should a prophet come to you confirming that which is already with you , you shall believe in him and shall help him . so saying , allah asked : 'do you agree and accept to take up the burden of the covenant ? ' they answered : 'we agree , ' he said : 'then bear wirness ; and i will be with you among the witness .
it scorches people 's skin
indeed , allah is with those who fear him and those who are doers of good .
 and they have devised a tremendous plot .
and those who made their abode in the city and in the faith before them love those who have fled to them , and do not find in their hearts a need of what they are given , and preferbefore themselves though poverty may afflict them , and whoever is preserved from the niggardliness of his soul , these it is that are the successful ones .
those who leave their homes in the cause of allah , and are then slain or die , - on them will allah bestow verily a goodly provision : truly allah is he who bestows the best provision .
and the hills are ground to powder
or is theirs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is between them ? then let them ascend throughways of access .
we believe in our lord , that he may pardon us our offences , and the sorcery thou hast constrained us to practise ; god is better , and more abiding . '
“ besides him – therefore all of you scheme against me and do not give me respite . ”
is with them the unseen , so that they write down ?
o my father , to me has come such knowledge as never came to you . so follow me that i may show you the right path .
except those who are steadfast
o ye who believe ! violate not the sanctity of the symbols of allah , nor of the sacred month , nor of the animals brought for sacrifice , nor the garlands that mark out such animals , nor the people resorting to the sacred house , seeking of the bounty and good pleasure of their lord . but when ye are clear of the sacred precincts and of pilgrim garb , ye may hunt and let not the hatred of some people inshutting you out of the sacred mosque lead you to transgression . help ye one another in righteousness and piety , but help ye not one another in sin and rancour : fear allah : for allah is strict in punishment .
there is nothing but our present life ; we die , and we live , and we shall not be resurrected .
there they pass from hand to hand a cup wherein is neither vanity nor cause of sin .
and what will make you to know what at-tariqis ?
on that day , intercession will not avail , except for him permitted by the merciful , and whose words he has approved .
and we created all things in pairs , so that you may ponder .
in that is a sign for those who fear the penalty of the hereafter : that is a day for which mankind will be gathered together : that will be a day of testimony .
he said : 'my nation , think ! if i have a clear proof from my lord and he has given me his mercy , who would help me against allah if i rebel against him ? indeed , you would do nothing for me except increase my loss '
yet the unbelievers say :  this is nothing but a lie he has concocted in which others have aided him .  they have come down to mischief and lies .
he said ,  have you come to us to turn us out of our land by means of your magic , moses ?
lot 's nation , belied their messengers .
they had earlier covenanted with allah that they would not turn their backs in flight . and a covenant made with allah must needs be answered for .
the fornicator shall marry none but a fornicatress or an idolatress ; and the fornicatress none shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolater ; that is forbidden to the believers .
the effort of one who faithfully strives hard for theof the life to come will be appreciated .
when we opened on them a gate of severe punishment , they utterly despaired .
we were indeed gracious to moses and aaron ,
they said ,  o moses , either you throw , or we will be the ones to throw . 
implore not to-day ; verily ye from us are not to be succoured .
in an elevated garden ,
has the story of abraham ’ s honorable guests reached you ?
they ask you about the sacred month and fighting in it . say : 'to fight in this month is a grave ; but to bar others from the path of allah , and disbelief in him , and the holy mosque , and to expel its inhabitants from it is greater with allah . dissension is greater than killing ' they will not cease to fight against you until they force you to renounce your religion , if they are able . but whosoever of you recants from his religion and dies an unbeliever , their works shall be annulled in this world and in the everlasting life , and those shall be the companions of hell , and there they shall live for ever .
that your companion is not confused , nor has he gone astray ,
the king said : ' i saw in a vision seven fatted cows being devoured by seven lean ones ; and seven green ears of corn and seven others withered . my counselors , tell me the meaning of my vision , if you can interpret visions '
had it been our will , we could have raised a warner in every village .
and tomadyantheir brother shu'ayb . he said ,  o my people , worship allah ; you have no deity other than him . there has come to you clear evidence from your lord . so fulfill the measure and weight and do not deprive people of their due and cause not corruption upon the earth after its reformation . that is better for you , if you should be believers .
and had they but believed and been mindful of god , his reward would have been far better for them , if they had but known it .
it is they whom allah has cursed ; and for those whom allah has cursed , youwill never find any supporter .
the word of your lord that the disbelievers will be the dwellers of hell fire has already been decreed .
so admonish . by your lord ’ s blessing , you are not a soothsayer , nor mad .
allah created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; indeed in this is a sign for the muslims .
invoke no god other than god , for there is no god but him . all things are bound to perish except himself . his is the judgement , and to him you shall be returned .
and when youtravel in the land , there is no sin on you if you shorten your salatif you fear that the disbelievers may attack you , verily , the disbelievers are ever unto you open enemies .
and when his lord tested abraham with certain words , and he fulfilled them . he said , 'behold , i make you a leader for the people . ' said he , 'and of my seed ? ' he said 'my covenant shall not reach the evildoers . '
and fight them until persecution is no more , and religion is for allah . but if they desist , then let there be no hostility except against wrong-doers .
deem those who commit ill deeds that we shall make them as those who believe and work righteous works ? equal is their life and their death ! how ill they judge !
when they passed by them they winked ,
and indeed you pass over them in the morning . –
then nearer to you and nearer !
and said those who received knowledge and faith , “ you have indeed stayed in the decree of allah until the day of restoration ; so this is the day of restoration , but you did not know . ”
indeed , they who have believed and done righteous deeds - those are the best of creatures .
that they may witness advantages for them and mention the name of allah during stated days over what he has given them of the cattle quadrupeds , then eat of them and feed the distressed one , the needy .
and those who , if they commit a shameful act or some wrong against themselves , remember god and seek forgiveness for their sins : for who can forgive except god ? they should not be perverse about their doings , knowingly .
say , ‘ tell me , if it is from allah and you disbelieve in it , and a witness from the children of israel has testified to its like and believed , while you are disdainful ? ’ indeed allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
 and from the evil of the envier when he envies . 
and you laugh and do not weep
i will never worship what you worship .
and mention in the book idrees . indeed , he was a truthful one and a prophet ,
nay , but those who do wrong follow their own lusts without knowledge , then who will guide him whom allah has sent astray ? and for such there will be no helpers .
and as for the lad , his parents were believers and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
o believers , when it is said to you 'make room in the assemblies ' , then make room , and god will make room for you ; and when it is said , 'move up ' , move up , and god will raise up in rank those of you who believe and have been given knowledge . and god is aware of the things you do .
said :  will you look down ? 
and the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree uprooted from the surface of earth having no stability .
whateverthey worship besides god can create nothing for they are themselves created .
and rehearse to themabraham 's story .
when harm afflicts you at sea , those you pray to vanish , except for him . but when he saves you to land , you turn away . the human being is ever thankless .
that this is indeed a qur'an most honourable ,
yet there are over you watchers
and moses came to you with the clear signs , then you took to yourselves the calf after him and you were evildoers .
as for those who hold fast to the book and are steadfast in prayer , we shall not deny the righteous their reward .
cursed wherever they are found , they will be seized and put to death .
do people think that they are left alone by saying : 'we are believers ' and will not be tried ?
we ourself shall see to its collection and recital .
blackness will cover them :
and they produced sham blood on his shirt . he said , ‘ no , your souls have made a matter seem decorous to you . yet patience is graceful , and allah is my resort against what you allege . ’
all praise belongs to allah , originator of the heavens and the earth , maker of the angelsmessengers , possessing wings , two , three or four . he adds to the creation whatever he wishes . indeed allah has power over all things .
and provides me with food and drink ,
certainly we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them over land and sea , and provided them with all the good things , and preferred them with a complete preference over many of those we have created .
believers , do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet and when speaking to him do not speak aloud as you speak aloud to one another , lest all your deeds are reduced to nothing without your even realising it .
 taste ye then - for ye forgot the meeting of this day of yours , and we too will forget you - taste ye the penalty of eternity for yourdeeds ! 
that you are indeed one of those sent
i call to witness those who scatterby dispersing ,
( into j hell ? they shall enter into it and an evil place it is to settle in .
alif-lam-ra ; these are verses of the book and the bright qur ’ an .
falsehood comes not to it from before it nor from behind it ; a sending down from one all-wise , all-laudable .
so we took each one in his sin ; of them was he on whom we sent a hurricane , and of them was he who was overtaken by thecry , and of them was he whom we caused the earth to swallow , and of them was he whom we drowned . it was not for allah to wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
when the idolaters see their partners they will call out :  o our lord , these are the partners we invoked instead of you ;  but they will retort :  you are liars . 
and if we had inflicted on them a penalty before this , they would have said :  our lord ! if only thou hadst sent us a messenger , we should certainly have followed thy signs before we were humbled and put to shame . 
who are certain that they will meet their lord and that they will return to him .
these are the dwellings – the affairs of which we relate to you ; and indeed theirnoble messengers came to them with clear proofs ; so they were not able to believe in what they had denied before ; this is how allah sets seals upon the hearts of disbelievers .
, surely we have granted you a clear victory
indeed allah helped you on many occasions – and on the day of huneyn – when you prided in your multitude , so it did not benefit you at all , and the earth despite being vast became restricted for you – then you turned back and returned .
when it is said to them :  follow what allah has sent down .  they say :  nay ! we shall follow what we found our fathers following .  even though their fathers did not understand anything nor were they guided ?
and those before them had denied – and these have not reached even a tenth of what we had given them – so they denied my noble messengers ; so how did my rejection turn out ?
and from it , he produced its water and its pasture .
nor is it the work of a soothsayer but only a few of you take heed .
and they remained in their cave for three hundred years and exceeded by nine .
where he will neither die , nor live .
and remember our servants , abraham , isaac and jacob , men of strength and insight .
and musa said : my people ! if ye have been believing in allah , then on him rely , if ye are muslims .
which pressed heavily upon your back ,
certainly in yusuf and his brothers there are signs for the inquirers .
then we will surely question those to whomwas sent , and we will surely question the messengers .
we have sent thee with the truth , good tidings to bear , and warning . thou shalt not be questioned touching the inhabitants of hell .
and mention thou in the book maryam , what time the retired from her people to a place eastward .
the hour that was to come draws ever nearer .
and of his signs he shows you lightning , for fear and hope , and that he sends down out of heaven water and he revives the earth after it is dead . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
i will leave you and those you invoke apart from god , and pray to my lord . haply in praying to my lord i will not be deprived . 
who will be heir to me , and heir to the house of jacob ; and make him obedient to you , o lord . 
this is allah ’ s command that he has sent down towards you ; and whoever fears allah – allah will relieve his sins and bestow upon him a great reward .
and if the disbelievers were to fight you , they will turn away and flee , and then they will not find any supporter nor any aide .
verily we gave moses the book ; so be not in doubt about his having received it ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify god . he is the majestic and all-wise .
and it is he who hath sent down rain from heaven and we have thereby brought forth growth of every kind , and thereout we have brought forth green stalks from which we bring forth close-growing seed- grain . and from the date-stone : from the spathe thereof come forth clusters of dates lowhanging ; and gardens of grapes , and the olive , and the pomegranate , like unto one anot her and unlike . look at the fruit thereof when it fruiteth and the reforming thereof . verily therein are signs unto a people who believe .
and he subjected to you the night and day , and the sun and moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command . surely in that are signs for a people who understand .
the day they see it , it shall be as if they had not stayedexcept for an evening or forenoon .
and we gave them signs in which lay clear favours .
but if ye are averse i have asked of you no wage . my wage is the concern of allah only , and i am commanded to be of those who surrender .
those who adopted the way of disbelief and died as disbelievers , are accursed of allah and of angels and of all mankind : they shall remain accursed for ever .
then when musa had fulfilled the term , and was journeying with his household , he saw a fire on the side of tur , and said unto his household : bide ye ; verily i see a fire afar , haply i may bring unto you tidings thereon , or a brand out : of the fire , haply ye may warm yourselves .
that day will man say :  where is the refuge ? 
he said , “ if only i had the strength against you or were able to get the refuge of some strong support ! ”
, tell them the story of noah who told his people ,  even if my belief and my preaching of the revelation of god seem strange to you , i put my trust in him . unite yourselves and seek help from your idols . you should not regret what you want to do , but should execute your plans against me without delay
he said :  i will never send him with you until you swear by god that you will bring him back to me , unless all of you are overtaken .  when they had given their promise , he said :  god is witness to our conversation . 
and this surely is great evidence if you can understand --
it is a written book ,
those who argue against god ’ s revelations , without any proof having come to them—a heinous sin in the sight of god , and of those who believe . thus god seals the heart of every proud bully .
on those who whisper hearsay in the ears of people ; and most of them are liars .
he created the heavens and the earth in six days , and willed to the throne . he knows what penetrates the earth and all that emerges from it ; all that descends from heaven and all that ascends to it . he is with you wherever you are . allah sees the things you do .
and we inspired the mother of moses , saying : suckle him and , when thou fearest for him , then cast him into the river and fear not nor grieve . lo ! we shall bring him back unto thee and shall make himof our messengers .
to the disbelievers ; of it there is no preventer .
so we sent this inspiration to the mother of moses :  suckle , but when thou hast fears about him , cast him into the river , but fear not nor grieve : for we shall restore him to thee , and we shall make him one of our messengers . 
they worked for him what he desired , high rooms , images , basins as large as reservoirs , andcauldrons fixed .  work you , o family of dawud , with thanks !  but few of my slaves are grateful .
lest a soul should say :  alas , i was heedless of god and only laughed ; 
their lord will bestow great blessings and mercy upon them ; such are the people who are rightly guided .
and have in their minds no favour from anyone for which a reward is expected in return ,
“ o yusuf ! disregard this – and o woman ! seek forgiveness for your sin ; indeed you are of the mistaken . ”
 those who would hinderfrom the path of allah and would seek in it something crooked : these were they who denied the hereafter ! 
so the king said :  bring ye him unto me .  but when the messenger came to him , said :  go thou back to thy lord , and ask him , 'what is the state of mind of the ladies who cut their hands ' ? for my lord is certainly well aware of their snare . 
when the hellfire sees them from a distant place , they will hear its fury and roaring .
so do not invent similitudes for god . indeed god knows , and you do not know .
god has made the day and the night , the sun and the moon , and all the stars subservient to you by his command . in this there is evidence of the truth for people of understanding .
and you see many of them hastening into sin and aggression and the devouring ofunlawful . how wretched is what they have been doing .
heknows the furtive looks of the eyes and what the chests conceal .
and we left for himamong generationsin later times ;
how can you disbelieve in allah when you were lifeless and he brought you to life ; then he will cause you to die , then he will bring youto life , and then to him you will be returned .
that ; and he who retaliates with the like of that with which he has been afflicted and he has been oppressed , allah will most certainly aid him ; most surely allah is pardoning , forgiving .
he said :  o my people , think . if i have a clear proof from my lord , and he has bestowed on me his grace , though unknown to you , can we force it upon you when you are averse ?
those who remain steadfast and put their trust in their lord .
pharaoh disobeyed our messenger , so we seized him remorselessly .
this is a reminder . let whoever wishes , take the right path to his lord .
but when they will behold it proximating sad will be the countenances of those who disbelieve , and it will be said : this is that which ye have been calling for .
surely we have sent to you a messenger as a witness over you , just as we had sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and whose seasoning is from tasneem ,
we have seen you , turning your face over and over again towards heaven . now , therefore , we turn you towards the giblah that you like best : so turn your face towards the masjid haram . henceforth , wheresoever you may be , turn your face at prayer towards it . the people who were given the book know it well that the commandmentis in fact from their lord , and is based on the truth , but allah is not unaware of what they are doing
and noah -- when he called before , and we answered him , and delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
they said : what shall be the meed of him , if ye are found liars !
and were it not that mankind would have become one community , we might well have appointed , for those who disbelieve in the beneficent , roofs of silver for their houses and stairswhereby to mount ,
if you asked them ,  who created the heavens and earth and subjected the sun and the moon ?  they would surely say ,  allah .  then how are they deluded ?
but the cautious shall live amongst gardens and fountains :
—turning to him in penitence , and be wary of him , and maintain the prayer , and do not be one of the polytheists
he who intercedes in a good cause shall share in its good result , and he who intercedes in an evil cause shall share in its burden . allah watches over everything .
to remain in them —a true promise of allah , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
when the heaven breaks apart .
so , we took vengeance on them . they are both on an open highway , plain to see .
and raising clouds of dust ,
said :  even if i showed you something clearconvincing ? 
whatever you spend and whatever vows you make are known to god , but the wrongdoers shall have no helpers .
hearken to your lord before the day arrives from god that will not be averted . you will have no place of refuge then nor time for denying .
the one to whom belongs the kingship of the heavens and of the earth , and has not chosen a child , and has no partner in his kingship , and he has created everything and kept it in proper measure .
those who are infidels will surely receive severe punishment both in this world and the next ; and none will they have to helpthem .
, exercise patience . the promise of god is true . whether we let you witness the suffering with which they were threatened or because of your death , we shall still punish them when they return to us .
and in the alternation of night and day , and the fact that allah sends down sustenance from the sky , and revives therewith the earth after its death , and in the change of the winds , - are signs for those that are wise .
say : 'expend willingly , or unwillingly , it shall not be accepted from you ; you are surely a people ungodly . '
and mention in the book ishmael . indeed , he was true to his promise , and an apostle and prophet .
do they not see that we made the night for them to rest therein , and the day for visibility ? surely in that are signs for people who believe .
and had we not fortified you , certainly you might have inclined toward them a bit .
which is your army that will come to your aid against the merciful lord ? but the unbelievers are in utter delusion .
and those who accuse their wives and do not have witnesses except their own statements – for such the testimony is that he bear the testimony four times by the name of allah that he is truthful .
and those who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever that which allah hath commanded should be joined , and make mischief in the earth : theirs is the curse and theirs the ill abode .
and covered by darkness .
the saying of the muslims when they are called towards allah and his noble messenger in order that the noble messenger judge between them is that they submit , “ we hear and we obey ” ; and it is they who have attained the goal .
nay , were ye to know with certainty of mind ,
for it has been thus whenever we sent a warner to any community . its affluent ones said ,  we reject what you have been sent with . 
they also have a sin against me , and i fear they will slay me . '
yet he desires that i should give more .
we will say to them ,  endure the torment ; the unbelievers deserve nothing better thanof fire . 
and for him who came to you striving ,
we have created the heavens and the earth and all that is between the two in accordance with the requirements of truth and wisdom . the hour is surely coming . so overlookwith gracious forgiveness .
and when you see them , their appearance would please you ; and when they speak , you would listen carefully to their speech ; like wooden blocks propped against the wall ; they assume every cry to be against them ; they are the enemy , so beware of them ; may allah slay them ! where are they reverting !
obey god and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , remember that our messenger is only responsible for clearly conveying the message .
if those had been gods , they would never have gone down to it ; yet every one of them shall therein abide forever ; '
pharaoh replied ,  certainly , and you shall also become my courtiers . 
and you will be requited nothing except for what you used to do ;
in a seat of truth , near the omnipotent king .
but they will never wish for death , because of what their own hands have sent on before them ; god is fully aware of the wrongdoers .
then if they do not answer thee , know that they are only following their caprices ; and who is further astray than he who follows his caprice without guidance from god ? surely god guides not the people of the evildoers .
so he hath put as a consequence hypocrisy into their hearts , till the day , whereon they shall meet him : because they broke their covenant with allah , and because they lied .
and their building which they have builded will not cease to be a cause of doubt in their hearts unless it be that their hearts are cut asunder ; and allah is knowing , wise .
they shall by no means harm you but with a slight evil ; and if they fight with you they shall turnbacks to you , then shall they not be helped .
whosoever fears the merciful in the unseen , and comes with a contrite heart .
and our commandment is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
indeed ibrahim was a leader , obedient to allah , and detached from all ; and he was not a polytheist .
corrupt women are for corrupt men , and corrupt men are for corrupt women ; good women are for good men and good men are for good women . the latter are absolved from anything they may say ; forgiveness and an honourable provision await them .
those who when they take the measure from mankind demand it full ,
and the earth and him who extended it ,
if we will , we can turn it into rubble ; then you will lament .
he said : remember ye that which ye did unto yusuf and his brother while ye were ignorant ?
no good is there in much of their whispers except in his who commandeth charity or kindness or reconciliation among mankind ; and whosoever doeth this seeking the good-will of allah , we shall presently give him a mighty hire .
and those who had desiredhis position the day before , began to say :  know you not that it is allah who enlarges the provision or restricts it to whomsoever he pleases of his slaves . had it not been that allah was gracious to us , he could have caused the earth to swallow us up ! know you not that the disbelievers will never be successful .
their messengers said unto them : we are but mortals like you , but allah giveth grace unto whom he will of his slaves . it is not ours to bring you a warrant unless by the permission of allah . in allah let believers put their trust !
before them , not one of the populations which we destroyed believed : will these believe ?
a messenger from allah reciting purified pages
thus does allah seal up the hearts of those who understand not .
and whatever good they do , nothing will be rejected of them ; for allah knows well those who are al-muttaqun .
it is we who created you and gave you shape ; then we bade the angels prostrate to adam , and they prostrate ; not so iblis ; he refused to be of those who prostrate .
we have sent the book down to you with the truth so that you may judge among mankind by means of what god has shown you . and do not be an advocate for the treacherous .
say thou : if it were ye who owned the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely refrain for fear of expending ; and man is ever miserly .
never standthere . a place of worship which was found upon dutyfrom the first day is more worthy that thou shouldst standtherein , wherein are men who love to purify themselves . allah loveth the purifiers .
they rejectand follow theirlusts but every matter has its appointed time .
right , to warn of great violence from him , and to give good tidings unto the believers , who do righteous deeds , that theirs shall be a goodly wage
neither do i worship what you worship .
and we do not knowwhether evil is intended for those on earth or whether their lord intends for them a right course .
warn them of the approaching day , when the hearts will be at the throats , choking with suppressed agony , the wrongdoers will have no sympathizer , nor any intercessor who might be heard .
messengers indeed were cried lies to before thee , yet they endured patiently that they were cried lies to , and were hurt , until our help came unto them . no man can change the words of god ; and there has already come to thee some tiding of the envoys .
but if you deny , then many a people have denied before you . the duty of the apostle is to convey the message clearly . 
do not keep your hand chained to your neck , nor open it altogether , or you will sit blameworthy and regretful .
the thunder celebrates his praise , and the angels , in awe of him , and he releases the thunderbolts and strikes with them whomever he wishes . yet they dispute concerning allah , though he is great in might .
there is no good in much of their secret talks , excepting him who enjoins charity or what is right or reconciliation between people , and whoever does that , seeking allah ’ s pleasure , soon we shall give him a great reward .
and they say : why has not an angel been sent down to him ? and had we sent down an angel , the matter would have certainly been decided and then they would not have been respited .
as hospitality from one , the forgiving , the most merciful '
say , ‘ to whom does the earth belong and whoever it contains , if you know ? ’
when they came to him , they said : “ peace ” ; he said : “ peace also be to you ; a group of strangers . ”
so thebecame black by the morning , like a pitch dark night .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all between them , if yehave an assured faith .
so turn thou away from them , and wait ; they too are waiting .
only lot believed inand said ,  i seek refuge in my lord , for he is majestic and all-wise  .
verily that which ye are promised is about to befall .
and indeed before this we made a covenant with adam , so he forgot , and we did not find its intention .
yet we have not given them any books to study , nor , before you , have we sent them a warner .
he then said , “ i feel sick ! ”
and whoever has done an atom 's weight of evil will see it .
it is to god alone that sincere obedience is due . and those who take other guardians besides him say ,  we serve them only that they may bring us nearer to god .  surely , god will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ . god does not guide anyone who is bent on lying and is a disbelieving liar .
we have indeed developed these women with an excellent development .
with lowered eyes , disgrace overcoming them ; and indeed they used to be called to prostrate themselves whilst they were healthy .
he shall speak to men in the cradle , and of age , and righteous he shall be . '
call back the soul , if ye are true ?
and we left it as a sign – so is there one who would ponder ?
never forget that the life of this world is only a game and a passing delight , a show , and mutual boasting and trying to outrival each other in riches and children . it is like the growth of vegetation after the rain , which delights the planter , but which then withers away , turns yellow and becomes worthless stubble . in the life to come there will be a terrible punishment , or god 's forgiveness and approval : the life of this world is nothing but means of deception .
who acknowledge the day of judgment ,
we will produce for you magic like it ; so make an appointment between us and you , which we will not miss—neither us , nor you—in a central place . ”
then , on top of it , they will have a brew of boiling liquid .
andthe true promise has approached ; then suddenly the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring ,  o woe to us ; we had been unmindful of this ; rather , we were wrongdoers . 
they said , “ do not fear – we convey to you the glad tidings of a knowledgeable boy . ”
' a hotchpotch of nightmares ! ' they said . 'we know nothing of the interpretation of nightmares . '
he will speak to the people while in his cradle and preach to them when he will be a man . he will be one of the righteous ones .
say : ' i take refuge with the lord of daybreak
and the moon , we have determined it in phases till it returns like an old palmbranch .
] said :  if i ask you anything after this , keep me not in your company , you have received an excuse from me . 
say : if you control the treasures of the mercy of my lord , then you would withholdfrom fear of spending , and man is niggardly .
they are awaiting only for one cry to seize them while they are yet disputing ,
say : who gives you the sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? say : allah . and most surely we or you are on a right way or in manifest error
the lord of moses and aaron .
and it is not the word of a poet ; little do you believe .
therefore be patient under the judgement of your lord , and do not obey either the sinner or the unbeliever .
and verily we ! we know that some among you are beliers thereof .
:  then should i seeklaw elsewhere than god , when it is he who has revealed this book to you , which distinctly explains ?  those to whom we have given the book know it has been sent by your lord in truth . so be not a sceptic .
they shall be humiliated wherever they are encountered , except through a rope from god , and a rope from the people ; and they incurred wrath from god , and were stricken with misery . that is because they rejected god ’ s revelations , and killed the prophets unjustly . that is because they rebelled and committed aggression .
say :  o people of the scripture : come to a word that is just between us and you , that we worship none but allah , and that we associate no partners with him , and that none of us shall take others as lords besides allah . then , if they turn away , say :  bear witness that we are muslims . 
said ,  i did it , then , while i was of those astray .
proceed to that which you denied .
and burning in hell .
 if thou dost punish them , they are thy servant : if thou dost forgive them , thou art the exalted in power , the wise . 
allah begins creation ; then he will repeat it ; then to him you will be returned .
or do they say , 'we are a congregation that shall be succoured ? '
can you make the deaf to hear , or show the blind , and those lost in clear error , the way ?
when our clear signs are rehearsed to them , thou wilt notice a denial on the faces of the unbelievers ! they nearly attack with violence those who rehearse our signs to them . say ,  shall i tell you of somethingworse than these signs ? it is the fire ! allah has promised it to the unbelievers ! and evil is that destination ! 
 and deliver us by thy mercy from those who reject . 
do they associate those with him who can not create a thing , and are themselves created ,
they will question thee concerning the spirit . say : 'the spirit is of the bidding of my lord . you have been given of knowledge nothing except a little . '
why did they not bring four witnesses to prove it ? when they have not brought the witnesses , such men , in the sight of allah , themselves as liars !
then , on that day , you will surely be questioned regarding the favours .
allah 's object also is to purge those that are true in faith and to deprive of blessing those that resist faith .
and if you are on a journey and can not find a scribe , then a security deposittaken . and if one of you entrusts another , then let him who is entrusted discharge his trustand let him fear allah , his lord . and do not conceal testimony , for whoever conceals it - his heart is indeed sinful , and allah is knowing of what you do .
we have indeed given you the seven oft-repeated , and the majestic qur'an .
say :  i would , if i disobeyed my lord , indeed have fear of the penalty of a mighty day .
then set-up firmly the mountains .
and none will deny it , except every transgressor , rebel .
and affection from us and purity , and he was fearing of allah
on the day you see it every nursing mother will be distracted from thatshe was nursing , and every pregnant woman will abort her pregnancy , and you will see the peopleintoxicated while they are not intoxicated ; but the punishment of allah is severe .
he verily will be content .
or , has he not been told of that which is in the scrolls of moses
they shall say : did not your apostles come to you with clear arguments ? they shall say : yea . they shall say : then call . and the call of the unbelievers is only in error .
and if we take thee away . we shall surely take vengeance on them .
bywho make a clear distinction between right and wrong
how will god guide a people who disbelieved after having believed , and had witnessed that the messenger is true , and the clear proofs had come to them ? god does not guide the unjust people .
who do not behave like the blind and the deaf , when the revelations of their lord are recited to them for admonition ;
it is we who sent down the quran upon you—a gradual revelation .
their greeting on the day they meet him will be :  peace ;  and he has a generous reward ready for them .
thosewho responded to allah and the messenger after injury had struck them . for those who did good among them and feared allah is a great reward -
, say ,  had the beneficent god really had a son , i would certainly have been the first one to worship him .
say thou : i seek refuge with the lord of mankind ,
and when the messengers are brought together at the appointed time --
 so he may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a stated term : for when the term given by allah is accomplished , it can not be put forward : if ye only knew . 
therefore patiently endurelike the courageous noble messengers had endured , and do not be impatient for them ; on the day when they see what they are promised , it will be as if they had not stayed on earth except part of a day ; this is to be conveyed ; will anyone be destroyed , except the disobedient ?
for those who have done good is the bestand even moreneither darkness nor dust nor any humiliating disgrace shall cover their faces . they are the dwellers of paradise , they will abide therein forever .
and to givethe lie you make your means of subsistence .
their end will be like pharaoh 's people and those before them ; they denied our signs , so god seized them in their sinfulness : god is stern in punishment .
my people , do not let your opposition to me lead you to commit sins or make you suffer what the people of noah , hud , and salih suffered . remember that the people of lot were destroyed not very long ago .
do they wait for aught but the hour , that it should come ! upon them all of a sudden while they do not perceive ?
and they say :  when will be this promise , - if you speak the truth ? 
those who accepted faith , and left their homes and fought with their wealth and their lives in allah ’ s way have a greater rank before allah ; and it is they who have succeeded .
if we had sent down this qur'an upon a mountain , you would have seen it humbled and coming apart from fear of allah . and these examples we present to the people that perhaps they will give thought .
that we may shew thee of our signs the greatest .
where they hear no idle speech ,
they desire to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths ; but allah seeks only to perfect his light , though the unbelievers hate it .
sitting face to face upon couches ,
and when 'iesacame withclear proofs , he said :  i have come to you with al-hikmah , and in order to make clear to you some of thein which you differ , therefore fear allah and obey me ,
we narrate unto youtheir story with truth : truly ! they were young men who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and beware of a day when no soul will avail another in the least , nor will any intercession be accepted on its behalf , nor will any ransom be taken from it , nor will they be helped .
and seek god 's forgiveness , for god is surely forgiving and kind .
we have adorned the earth with attractive things , so that we may test mankind as to which one is best in conduct ,
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels , “ bow down before adam ; ” so they bowed down , except for satan ; he was not of those who bowed down .
it is a guide and mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have sent down the book , and who read it as it should be read , believe in it truly ; but those who deny it will be losers .
truly , this is a great victory ! 
when a section of them said :  o people of yathrib , there is no place for you here , turn back ;  and a section of them asked leave of the prophet , saying :  our homes lie exposed ,  -- while they were not exposed . their only intention was to run away .
again destroyed is he , how he planned ! -
rejoicing over their efforts .
did you not see those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? where are they being diverted ?
surely those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , these it is on whom is the curse of allah and the angels and men all ;
and admonish , for verily admonition profiteth the believers .
“ o both my fellow-prisoners ! are various lords better , or one allah , the dominant above all ? ”
and joseph 's brethren came and presented themselves before him , and he knew them but they knew him not .
except those devoted to salat
by the mount ,
have they a share in the kingdom ? they would never have given an iota to the people .
but he who says to his parents : “ fie on you ! do you threaten me that i shall be resurrected , although myriad generations have passed away before me ? ” the parents beseech allah : “ woe to you , have faith . surely allah 's promise is true. ” but he says : “ all this is nothing but fables of olden times . ”
if we wish , we would take away what we have revealed to you . then you would not find for yourself any defender against us ,
and indeed allah has sent down to you in the book that whenever you hear the signs of allah being rejected or being made fun of , do not sit with those people , until they engage in some other conversation ; or else you too are like them ; undoubtedly allah will gather the hypocrites and the disbelievers , all together , into hell .
and the people of aykah were also wrong-doers .
where then will you go ?
did we not give him two eyes ?
o my people , i fear for you the day of invocation ,
then he caused him to die and brought him to the grave ,
and if our clear verses are recited to them , they say , “ he is nothing but a man who wishes to turn you away from the deities of your forefathers ! ” ; and they say , “ this is nothing but a fabricated lie ” ; and said the disbelievers regarding the truth when it reached them , “ this is nothing but obvious magic . ”
if we so pleased , we could turn your harvest into chaff . then you would start lamenting ,
or increase a little upon it , and recite the qur ’ an slowly in stages .
we have made it easy to learn lessons from the quran : is there anyone who would receive admonition ?
his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth , and to him are all matters referred .
and those who disputeas regards our ayatmay know that there is no place of refuge for them .
and there is not of aught but with us are the treasures thereof , and we send it not down save in a measure known
he said , “ rather , your souls have contrived something for you . patience is a virtue . perhaps god will bring them all back to me . he is the knowing , the wise . ”
they will say , ‘ had not your apostles brought you manifest proofs ? ’ they will say , ‘ yes. ’ they will say , ‘ then invokeyourselves. ’ but the invocations of the faithless only go awry .
and we cut them up into twelve tribes as communities . and we revealed unto musa , when his people asked him for drink : smite the rock with thy rod . then gushed forth therefrcm twelve springs : every people already knew their drinking-places . and we shaded them with thick clouds , and we sent down upon them the manna and the quails , saying : eat of the clean things wherewith we have provided you . and they wronged not us , but themselves they were wont to wrong .
these are they whom allah hath favoured , from among the prophets , of the progeny of adam and of them whom we bare with nuh , and of the progeny of ibrahim and isra'il , and of those whom we have guided and chosen ; whenever the revelations of the compassionate were rehearsed unto them , they fell down prostrating themselves and weeping . * chapter : 19
whoever does good will receive better than what he has done ; and whoever does ill shall be requited but to the extent of what he does .
the first house established for the people was that at bekka , a place holy , and a guidance to all beings .
it is he who sends down upon his servant clear revelations , to bring you out of darkness into the light . god is gentle towards you , most compassionate .
those who were before themschemed . then allah came at their edifice from the foundations and the roof fell down upon them from above and the punishment overtook them whence they were not aware .
it hath seven gates , and each gate hath an appointed portion .
then revealed to his servant that he revealed .
the reward in the next life will certainly be better for you than worldly gains .
say thou : would ye appraise allah of your religion , whereas allah knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , and allah is of everything aware !
i swear by what you see
but if you donot , then be apprised of war from allah and his apostle ; and if you repent , then you shall have your capital ; neither shall you makesuffer loss , nor shall you be made to suffer loss .
al-lahas barred them from allah 's way ] so that they do not worshipallah , orso that they may worshipallah , who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you conceal and what you reveal .
this is because the worldly life was dearer to them than the hereafter ; and because allah does not guide such disbelieving people .
fear of you is more intense in their hearts than fear of god . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
if then it gets known that these two had been guilty of sin , let two others stand forth in their places , nearest in kin from among those who claim a lawful right . let them swear by allah :  we affirm that our testimony is truer than that of both of them , and that we have not trespassed , for then indeed we should be of the wrong-doers . 
and let not those whowithhold what allah has given them of his bounty ever think that it is better for them . rather , it is worse for them . their necks will be encircled by what they withheld on the day of resurrection . and to allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth . and allah , with what you do , isacquainted .
god certainly fulfilled his promise to you when you were fighting the unbelievers , by his permission . even after we showed you what you wanted , you began to lose courage , started quarreling with each other , and disobeyed god 's orders . some of you want worldly gains and others of you want rewards in the hereafter . then he let you face defeat in order to test you . however , he forgave you . god is gracious to the believers .
we did not send you except as a bearer of good news and warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
“ stamp with your foot—here is cool water to wash with , and to drink . ”
of some messengers we have already told thee the story ; of others we have not ; - and to moses allah spoke direct ; -
so they both raced each other to the door , and she tore his shirt from the back : they both found her lord near the door . she said :  what is thepunishment for one who formed an evil design against thy wife , but prison or a grievous chastisement ? 
“ proceed to a shadow of three different masses . ”
on the day when the trumpet shall be blown , and we will gather the guilty , blue-eyed , on that day
so watch , ; indeed , they are watching .
nay ! do those who have wrought evil deeds think that we will make them like those who believe and do good -- that their life and their death shall be equal ? evil it is that they judge .
youcan postponewhom you will of them , and you may receive whom you will . and whomsoever you desire of those whom you have set aside , it is no sin on you , that is better ; that they may be comforted and not grieved , and may all be pleased with what you give them . allah knows what is in your hearts . and allah is ever allknowing , most forbearing .
shall the recompense of goodness be anything other than goodness ?
and ar-ra'dglorifies and praises him , and so do the angels because of his awe , he sends the thunderbolts , and therewith he strikes whom he wills , yet theydispute about allah . and he is mighty in strength and severe in punishment .
for pharaoh had led his people astray and did not guide them .
unquestionably , to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and earth . already he knows that upon which youandthe day when they will be returned to him and he will inform them of what they have done . and allah is knowing of all things .
if you are true to your claim that there is no day of judgment ,
do ye then wonder at this recital ?
allah has ordained : ‘ i shall surely prevail , i and my apostles. ’ indeed allah is all-strong , all-mighty .
those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance that we have sent down , after we have shown them clearly in the book -- they shall be cursed by god and the cursers ,
you are mortal , and they are mortal
he and his hosts behaved arrogantly in the land without any justification , thinking that they would not be recalled to us ,
can youmake the deaf to hear , or can you guide the blind or him who is in manifest error ?
it was he who created the heavens and the earth in truth . on the day when he says : 'be ' it shall be . his word is the truth . his shall be the kingdom on the day when the horn is blown . the knower of the unseen and the visible , and he is the wise , the aware .
you will find others desiring to be secure from you , and secure from their own nation . whenever they are called back to sedition , they plunge into it . if they do not keep away from you and offer you peace , and restrain their hands , take them and kill them wherever you find them . those , over them , we give you clear authority .
the lord said ,  the land will be prohibited to them for forty yearsthey will wander in the land . do not feel sad for the evil-doing people . 
and then made the course of life easy for him ,
so he came forth unto his people from the sanctuary , then he made signal to them , 'give you glory at dawn and evening . '
 'ask at the town where we have been and the caravan in which we returned , andwe are indeed telling the truth . ' 
the unbelievers say : 'the hour will never come to us ' say : 'by my lord , yes , it is surely coming to you ! by him who knows the unseen , not even the weight of an atom in heavens and earth escapes him ; neither is there anything smaller than that , nor greater except that it is in a clear book ,
we have not taught him any poetry nor would it be fitting for him . this is merely a reminder and a clear quran
both abounding in branches .
we also gave them clear evidence in support of the true religion . only after having received knowledge did they create differences among themselves because of their rebelliousness . your lord will issue his decree concerning their differences on the day of judgment .
: 'eat and drink , with a good appetite , for all that you did '
those of the wandering arabs who were left behind will tell thee : our possessions and our households occupied us , so ask forgiveness for us ! they speak with their tongues that which is not in their hearts . say : who can avail you aught against allah , if he intend you hurt or intend you profit ? nay , but allah is ever aware of what ye do .
are the people astonished that a man who is one of them was commanded by us to warn them and to bring glad tidings to those who believe that they have a true precedence with their lord ? the unbelievers say :  he is a clear sorcerer . 
such will be the hospitality they receive on the day of retribution .
he said : the knowledge is with allah only . i convey unto you that wherewith i have been sent , but i see you are a folk that know not .
we sent to the people of 'ad their brother hud , who said :  o my people , worship god ; you have no other god but he.you are only inventing lies .
we encompassed them in our mercy ; they were righteous people .
lot 's people also gave the lie to the warnings ,
thus ! and we made other people inherit !
when the disciples said :  o jesus , son of mary , could your lord send down for us a table laid with food ?  he said :  fear god , if indeed you believe . 
and when tile hypocrites , and those in whose hearts is sickness , said , 'god and his messenger promised us only delusion . '
as sustenance for the servants . and we revive thereby a dead town . likewise is the resurrection .
and there will fail them those whom they had been calling upon aforetime , and they will perceive that there is for them no shelter .
and those who fulfil their trusts and covenants ,
sent down by the almighty , the most merciful .
whenappears to them from a distance they will hear it raging and roaring .
these are the bounds set by allah . allah will make the man who obeys allah and his messenger enter the gardens beneath which rivers flow . he will abide there for ever . that is the mighty triumph .
we have sent clear signs to you , such as none can deny except those who transgress the truth .
it is he who made the sun radiant , and the moon a light , and determined phases for it—that you may know the number of years and the calculation . god did not create all this except with truth . he details the revelations for a people who know .
just think : if we let them enjoyfor a few years more ,
those who reject our ayatare deaf and dumb in darkness . allah sends astray whom he wills and he guides on the straight path whom he wills .
we consolidated his kingdom and gave him wisdom and conclusive speech .
o people who believe ! firmly establish the commands of allah , giving testimony with justice – and do not let the enmity of anyone tempt you not to do justice ; be just ; that is nearer to piety – and fear allah ; indeed allah is well aware of your deeds .
when they entered upon david , so he feared them – they said , “ do not fear ! we are two disputants , one of whom has wronged the other , therefore judge fairly between us and do not judge unjustly – and show us the right way . ”
satan holds out to you the threat of poverty and prompts you to adopt a shameless niggardly conduct , but allah holds out from himself the promise of pardon and bounty : allah is all-embracing , all-knowing .
when the two receiving angels receive from him , one seated on the right and one on the left .
thus . and we caused to inherit it the children of israel .
“ and i am commanded that i be the first to submit . ”
alif , lam , meem .
nay , but they have denied the truth when it came unto them , therefor they are now in troubled case .
indeed your lord is gracious to mankind , but most of them do not give thanks .
for they said ; is it a mortal man , alone among us , that we are to follow ? then indeed we should fall into error and madness .
those who believe should not take unbelievers as their friends in preference to those who believe -- and whoever does so should have noof god -- unless to safeguard yourselves against them . but god commands you to beware of him , for to god you will journey in the end .
job when he called to his lord :  i am afflicted with distress , and you are the most compassionate of all . 
surelythose who return on their backs after that guidance has become manifest to them , the shaitan has made it a light matter to them ; and he gives them respite .
and their taking usury though indeed they were forbidden it and their devouring the property of people falsely , and we have prepared for the unbelievers from among them a painful chastisement .
if only they had been content with what god and his messenger had given them and had said ,  god is sufficient for us . god will give us out of his bounty , and so will his messenger . to god alone do we turn with hope ! 
but their belief profited them naught when they saw our prowess . this hath been allah 's dispensation that hath- been in regard to his bondmen . and then there were lost the infidels .
and most certainly we will try you until we have known those among you who exert themselves hard , and the patient , and made your case manifest .
the great horrorshall not grieve them , and the angels will welcome them , saying ,  this is your day which you have been promised . 
this is hell , which the criminals deny .
so they departed , conversing in secret low tones ,
and those who believe and have emigrated and striven hard in the way of allah , those who sheltered and succoured -- these ! they are the believers in very truth ; for them shall be forgiviness and honourable provision .
by the dawn
and he reviewed the birds , then said : how is it i see not the hoopoe or is it that he is of the absentees ?
then , when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek of allah 's grace , and remember allah much , that haply ye may thrive .
they advance one upon another , asking each other questions .
though all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea-seven seas after it to replenish it , yet would the words of god not be spent . god is all-mighty , all-wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it , because they were afraid of it . but man bore it : he surely proved unjust and ignorant .
we have truly sent thee as a witness , as a bringer of glad tidings , and as a warner :
those who do not believe in the life to come call the angels by female names .
therefore , judge decisively between me and them ; and save me and the believers who are with me . 
but say not - for any false thing that your tongues may put forth , -  this is lawful , and this is forbidden ,  so as to ascribe false things to allah . for those who ascribe false things to allah , will never prosper .
those who believe and do good , they shall surely have gardens of bliss ,
have you not considered those who act hypocritically ? they say to their brethren who disbelieved among the people of the book , “ if you are evicted , we will leave with you , and will not obey anyone against you ; and should anyone fight you , we will certainly support you. ” but god bears witness that they are liars .
and when we show favour to man , he withdraws and turns away , but when evil touches him , then he has recourse to long supplications .
hast thou not seen those who exchanged the bounty of god with unthankfulness , and caused their people to dwell in the abode of ruin ? --
and we saved him and those with him by a mercy from us , and we cut the root of those who denied our revelations and were not believers .
and say : 'we believe in it ' but how can they reach from a place that is distant ,
none except you , o disbelievers – you love what you have , the fleeting one .
we help these and those , a gift from your lord ; and your lord 's gift is not restricted .
and among them are men who listen to thee , but in the end , when they go out from thee , they say to those who have received knowledge ,  what is it he said just then ?  such are men whose hearts allah has sealed , and who follow their own lusts .
o dear prophet , wage holy war against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be strict with them ; and their destination is hell ; and what a wretched outcome !
it is not for them , nor are they able .
and our command is but one , as the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and he the last , the transcendent and the immanent ; and he has knowledge of everything .
arise , and warn ,
have you also reflected upon the matter concerning the chiefs of the israelites aftermoses ? they said to their prophet ,  appoint a king for us so that we may fight in the way of allah .  the prophet asked them ,  might it be that you will not fight , if fighting is prescribed for you ?  they replied ,  how can it be that we would refuse to fight in the way of allah when we have been turned out of our homes and separated from our children ?  butwhen they were enjoined to fight , they all , except a few of them , turned their backs . and allah knows each and everyone of these transgressors .
we have subdued them to them , and some of them they ride , and some they eat ;
and say not of anything : lo ! i shall do that tomorrow ,
and she took , in seclusion from them , a screen . then we sent to her our angel , and he represented himself to her as a well-proportioned man .
a sacred month is for a sacred month ; these sacrednesses are in retaliation . whosoever then offereth violence unto you , offer violence unto him the like of his violence unto you , and fear allah , and know that allah is with the god-fearing .
and the grasses and the trees bowin adoration .
so when i have fashioned him and breathed into himsoul created by me , then you fall down prostrate to him . 
and we have indeed destroyed your kind , so is there one who would ponder ?
as for those who believe and do good works , we shall admit them to gardens underneath which rivers flow , they are there for eternity , and for them purified spouses . and we shall admit them into plenteous shade .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , that he may double it for him and his may be a rich reward ?
and whoever obeys allah and his messenger and fears allah and is conscious of him - it is those who are the attainers .
and i have followed the religion of my fathers , abraham and isaac and jacob . it never was for us to attribute aught as partner to allah . this is of the bounty of allah unto usand unto mankind ; but most men give not thanks .
they replied : 'we have not failed in our promise to you through our choosing . we were laden with fardels , even the ornaments of the nation , and threw them just as the samaritan had thrown them ,
if you want to take another wife in place of the one you are married to , then even if you have given her a talent of gold , do not take back a thing . would you take it away by slandering and using unjust means ?
among you is he who lags behind . then , when a calamity befalls you , he says , “ god has favored me , that i was not martyred with them . ”
ad treatedas a lie , so howwas my punishment and my warning !
pay heed ! indeed to allah only belong whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earth ; he knows the condition you are in ; and on the day when they are returned to him , he will then inform them of whatever they did ; and allah knows all things .
to remain in them ; they will not seek to leave it for another place .
they shall abide in them forever . this is allah 's promise that shall come true . he is the most powerful , the most wise .
we shall soon put those who disbelieve in our signs into the fire ; whenever their skins are cookedwe shall change them for new skins so they may taste the punishment ; indeed allah is almighty , wise .
and make thou the ark under our eyes and our revelation ; and address me not regarding those that have done wrong ; verily they are to be drowned .
and grieve not for them and be not distressed because of what they plan .
he will then send him to death and have him laid in the grave .
moses said to his people ,  why do you create difficulties for me when you know that i am god 's messenger to you ?  when they deviated , god led their hearts astray . god does not guide the evil-doing people .
'if we had so willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but now my word is realized --  assuredly i shall fill gehenna with jinn and men all together . 
when the polytheists sight their partners , they will say , ‘ our lord ! these are our partners whom we used to invoke besides you. ’ but they will retort to them , ‘ you are indeed liars ! ’
there is no god but he : that is the witness of allah , his angels , and those endued with knowledge , standing firm on justice . there is no god but he , the exalted in power , the wise .
we revealedto moses and his brother , saying ,  set aside for your people some houses in the city and turn them into places of worship , and be constant in prayer ! and givethe good news to the believers . 
but he who fears from a testator some unjust act or wrong-doing , and thereupon he makes peace between the parties concerned , there shall be no sin on him . certainly , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
when something good came their way , they said , “ this is ours. ” and when something bad happened to them , they ascribed the evil omen to moses and those with him . in fact , their omen is with god , but most of them do not know .
say :  even if you owned the stores of the mercy of my lord , you would have held them back for fear of spending them , for man is niggardly . 
offspring one of the other ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
no equal has he , i am commanded , and that i am the first to submit . 
and he was building the ship , and every time that chieftains of his people passed him , they made mock of him . he said : though ye make mock of us , yet we mock at you even as ye mock ;
but no ; i swear by what you see ,
‘ thatis because you used to boast unduly on the earth and because you used to strut .
but when they see it drawing near , the faces of those who deny the truth will turn gloomy and they will be told ,  this is what you were calling for . 
 go to fir'aun ! verily , he has transgressed . 
and if ye do it not - and ye can never do it - then guard yourselves against the fire prepared for disbelievers , whose fuel is of men and stones .
abundance diverts you ,
have you not seen that they wander distract in every valley ,
said yaqub , “ your souls have fabricated an excuse for you ; therefore patience is excellent ; it is likely that allah will bring all * of them to me ; undoubtedly only he is the all knowing , the wise . ”
has there reached you the report of the overwhelming ?
with you , nor backed anyone against you . so fulfill the treaty with them untilits term . indeed allah loves the godwary ) .
so they went off , while whispering to one another .
but if any man fears injustice or sin from one making testament , and so makes things right between them , then sin shall not rest upon him ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
and indeed , your lord - he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
one day will the hypocrites- men and women - say to the believers :  wait for us ! let us borrowfrom your light !  it will be said :  turn ye back to your rear ! then seek a light !  so a wall will be put up betwixt them , with a gate therein . within it will be mercy throughout , and without it , all alongside , will bepunishment !
and thou shalt be allowed in yonder city -
on this life and the hereafter . they ask thee concerning orphans . say :  the best thing to do is what is for their good ; if ye mix their affairs with yours , they are your brethren ; but allah knows the man who means mischief from the man who means good . and if allah had wished , he could have put you into difficulties : he is indeed exalted in power , wise . 
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose ; god knows what is in the hearts .
what is the life of this world but amusement and play ? but verily the home in the hereafter , - that is life indeed , if they but knew .
and then cut off his aorta ,
he is allah , my lord , and i will not associate anyone with my lord .
let any who will , keep it in remembrance !
and fight against them until the mischief ends and the way prescribed by allah - the whole of it -prevail then , if they give up mischief , surely allah sees what they do .
say : 'shall i tell you who will receive a worse recompense from allah than that ? those whom allah has cursed and with whom he is angry , and made some of them apes and swine , and those who worship the devil . the place of these is worse , and they have strayed further from the right path '
and indeed we have put forth every kind of example in this quran , for mankind . but , man is ever more quarrelsome than anything .
would you then ask your prophet such questions as were asked of moses in former times ? in fact , anyone , who changes the way of belief for that of disbelief , has surely swerved from the right way .
behold , we shall cast upon you a weighty word .
they slept very little during the night
why , is he who was dead , and we gave him life , and appointed for him a light to walk by among the people as one whose likeness is in the shadows , and comes not forth from them ? so it is decked out fair to the unbelievers the things they have done .
as for the sinners , they will be in the torment of hell forever .
 go thou , with this letter of mine , and deliver it to them : then draw back from them , andsee what answer they return  ...
this is because allah only is the truth , and what they worship other than him , is itself falsehood , and because allah only is the supreme , the great .
or like abundant rain from the cloud in which is utter darkness and thunder and lightning ; they put their fingers into their ears because of the thunder peal , for fear of death , and allah encompasses the unbelievers .
and indeed we should have guided them to a straight way .
do they say that he himself has forged this message ? tell them : 'if i have forged this , the guilt of it will fall upon me , but i am not responsible for the crimes you are committing .
the egyptian who bought him said to his wife ,  lodge him honourably , he may prove of benefit to us , or we may even adopt him as our son .  thus we established joseph in the land , so that we might teach him the true meaning of events . god has power over all things . however , most people do not know this .
like the example of satan when he says to man ,  disbelieve .  but when he disbelieves , he says ,  indeed , i am disassociated from you . indeed , i fear allah , lord of the worlds . 
who will give a goodly loan to god which he might double many times ? for god withholds and enlarges , and to him you will return .
whosoever desires honourthat all honour is with god . all good words ascend to him , and all good deeds he exalts . as for those who are plotting evil , there is severe punishment for them , and their plots will be fruitless .
by the heaven and the night-comer
abraham said ,  have you really thought about what you have been worshipping ,
golden dishes and cups will be passed among them . all that the souls may desire and that may delight their eyes will be available therein . you will live therein forever .
or , that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , and they will not be able to frustrate him ?
, say ,  god knows best how long they stayed there ; to him belongs the unseen of both the heavens and the earth . how clear is his sight and how keen his hearing ! no one other than him is their guardian and no one shares his judgment .
and the moon when at the full ,
and verily , your lord ! he is truly the all-mighty , the most merciful .
and if you ask them as to who created them , they will surely answer “ allah ” – so where are they reverting ?
and had they believed in allah and the prophet and what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them for friends but ! most of them are transgressors .
if only you would realize , their account is with my lord .
they have made their oaths as a shield to obstruct others from the way of god . they will suffer a humiliating torment .
the day when they shall hear the cry in truth ; that is the day of coming forth .
salih said : 'my people ! what do you think ? if i had a clear evidence from my lord , and then he also bestowed his mercy upon me , who will rescue me from the punishment of allah if i still disobey him ? you can only make me lose even more .
 you were oblivious of this , so we have removed the veil , and how keen is your sight today ! 
a revelation from himwho has created the earth and high heavens .
his sons said : 'father , ask forgiveness for our sins . we have indeed been sinners '
noah called out to his lord , saying : ' o lord , my son was of my family , and your promise is surely the truth . you are the most just of judges '
say : 'who is the lord of the seven heavens , and of the great throne '
and the mountains will be set in motion and become a mirage .
and we led the children of israel across the sea . then pharaoh and his hosts pursued them in iniquity and transgression until pharaoh cried out while he was drowning : ' i believe that there is no god but allah in whom the children of israel believe , and i am also one of those who submit to allah .
your lord has said ,  pray to me for i shall answer you prayers . those who are too proud to worship me will soon go to hell in disgrace  .
your lord well knows what they hide in their breasts and what they disclose .
and they conspired an immense conspiracy .
verily we so subjected the mountains that they should hallow us with him at nightfall and sunrise .
on the day when the heaven will convulse in a great convulsion ,
for when the trumpet shall sound ,
indeed those who say : 'allah is the third of the trinity ' became unbelievers . there is but one god . if they do not desist in what they say , a painful punishment will afflict those of them that disbelieve .
“ send him with us tomorrow , that he may roam and play ; we will take care of him . ”
so they hamstrung her , and in the morning could only regret .
they said , “ pray to your lord that he may reveal its colour to us ” ; answered moosa , “ indeed he says it is a yellow cow , of bright colour , pleasing to the beholders . ”
“ peace ” shall be the word conveyed to them from their merciful lord .
they are the ones whom allah has blessed from among the prophets of adam ’ s progeny , and fromthose we carried with noah , and from among the progeny of abraham and israel , and from among those that we guided and chose . when the signs of the all-beneficent were recited to them , they would fall down weeping in prostration .
thus there did not come to those before them an apostle but they said : a magician or a mad man .
so we seized him and his hosts , and we cast them into the sea , and he blameworthy .
will you not then reflect ?
by the house greatly frequented ;
why was there never a city that believed , and its belief profited it ? -- except the people of jonah ; when they believed , we removed from them the chastisement of degradation in this present life , and we gave unto them enjoyment for a time .
no indeed ! the truth is that their hearts have become rusted on account of their evil deeds .
ask thou forgiveness for them or ask thou not forgiveness for them : if thou askest forgiveness for them seventy times , allah will forgive them not . this , because they disbelieved in allah and his apostle , and allah guideth not an ungodly people .
on the day when allah will resurrect them all togetherand inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it , while they have forgotten it . and allah is witness over all things .
his companion attendant will say ,  i have here his record ready . 
and as to those who hold fast to the bookand perform as-salat , certainly , we shall never waste the reward of those who do righteous deeds .
have they not travelled on the earth , so that they might see what wise hath been the end of those before them . although they were stronger than these in power ? and allah is not such that aught in the heavens and the earth can frustrate him . verily , he is ever the knowing , the potent .
satan has taken hold of them , and so has caused them to forget the remembrance of god . these are the partisans of satan . indeed , it is satan ’ s partisans who are the losers .
beautified is the life of this world for those who disbelieve , and they mock at those who believe . but those who obey allah 's orders and keep away from what he has forbidden , will be above them on the day of resurrection . and allah givesto whom he wills without limit .
 and we used to deny the day of judgment ,
the revelation of the book , there is no doubt in it , is from the lord of the worlds .
then indeed you die after that .
there is among them a section who distort the book with their tongues : you would think it is a part of the book , but it is no part of the book ; and they say ,  that is from allah ,  but it is not from allah : it is they who tell a lie against allah , andthey know it !
but they said ,  have you come to us to turn us away from our deities ? then bring down upon us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . 
and tall palm-trees with their thickly-clustered dates ,
as for those who are faithless , let their faithlessness not grieve you . to us will be their return , and we will inform them about what they have done . indeed allah knows best what is in the breasts .
and he hath subjected for you whatsoever he hath multiplied for you on the earth of various kinds . verily therein is a sign for a people who receive admonition .
and among the people are those who take to themselves rivals , other than allah , loving them as allah is loved . but those who believe are more loving to allah . when the harmdoers see when they see the punishment because the power altogether belongs to allah , and that allah is firm in punishment ,
but they rejected him , so a severe earthquake overtook them , and they became motionless bodies in their abode .
and we shall never be punished '
they alone invent lies who do not believe in the words of god , and they are liars .
allah does not lead any people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should beware of . indeed allah has knowledge of all things .
and relate to them the account of the two men – to one we gave two gardens of grapes , and covered them with date-palms and kept farms between them .
the day on which no soul will have the authority over any other soul ; and on that day , the entire command belongs to allah .
surely we have brought them a book which we expounded with knowledge ; a guidance and a mercy to those who believe '
to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and whether you disclose what is in your hearts or hide it , allah will take account of it from you ; so he will forgive whomever he wills and punish whomever he wills ; and allah is able to do all things .
surely , allah is the provider , the possessor of power , the mighty .
this is allah ’ s munificence , which he may give to whomever he wills ; and allah is extremely munificent .
but they impugned him , whereupon the earthquake seized them , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes .
to admonish them . we have never been unjust .
 we are your protectors in this life and in the hereafter : therein shall ye have all that your souls shall desire ; therein shall ye have all that ye ask for ! -
we therefore took revenge from them ; and indeed both these townships are situated on an open road .
he is the living : there is no god but he : call upon him , giving him sincere devotion . praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and certainly those before them rejected , then how was my disapproval .
say : surely my lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom he pleases and straitens , but most men do not know .
highly blessed is he , who has sent down al-furqan , to his servant so that it may be a warner to all mankind :
he it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye may repose therein and the day enlightening . verily in that are signs for a people who listen .
and we have explained to man , in this qur'an , every kind of similitude : yet the greater part of men refuseexcept with ingratitude !
and when there toucheth you a distress on the sea , those whom ye call upon fall away except him alone , then when he delivereth you on the land ye turn away : and man is ever ungrateful .
that man is surely in a state of loss ,
the day on which the spirit and the angels shall stand in ranks ; they shall not speak except he whom the beneficent allah permits and who speaks the right thing .
the prophet will say :  o my lord , my people had fettered the qur'an . 
such is the torment if only they knew that the torment in the life hereafter will certainly be greater .
tell my worshipers that i am the forgiving , the most merciful ,
your lord has decreed : do not worship any but him ; be good to your parents ; and should both or any one of them attain old age with you , do not say to them even  fie  neither chide them , but speak to them with respect ,
that we seized them with chastisementthey did not humble themselves before their lord , nor do they entreat
and leave your wives whom your lord has created for you ? no , but you are a transgressing nation '
and know that your properties and your children are but a trial and that allah has with him a great reward .
they shall have chastisement in this world 's life , and the chastisement of the hereafter is certainly more grievous , and they shall have no protector against allah .
they know the outward of this world 's life , but of the hereafter they are absolutely heedless .
we would be single-minded slaves of allah .
enter the garden , you and your spouses , and be glad . 
their wealth or children should not tempt you ; god wants to punish them through these things in this life so that they will die as disbelievers .
have we not made seven strong heavens above you ,
a lying , sinful forehead .
he who created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days and then established himself above the throne - the most merciful , so ask about him one well informed .
reclining there on carpets lined with brocade , fruits of the garden hanging low within reach .
by the dawn-raiders
allah said : verily i am going to send it down to you , but whosoever of you disbelieveth thereafter , verily shall torment him with a torment wherewith i shall not torment any other of the worlds .
remember when he made you successors to the 'ad and settled you in the land . you built palaces on its plains and carved houses out of the mountains . remember god 's blessings and do not spread corruption in the land , 
surely in that case i should indeed be in evident error .
so set thy face to the religion , a man of pure faith -- god 's original upon which he originated mankind . there is no changing god 's creation . that is the right religion ; but most men know it not --
and food that chokes and a painful punishment ,
i seek of you no reward for this : my reward is with none except the lord of the universe .
then we inspired moses , saying ,  throw down your staff .  and it immediately swallowed up their false devices .
but we sent aforetime , among them , to admonish them ; -
and it is he who , from fluid , created the human being . then he made relationships through marriage and mating . your lord is omnipotent .
then it will be said unto them : where are those whom ye have been associating
and we gave him out of our mercy his brother aaron as a prophet .
the like of what happened to the people of pharaoh , and those before them . they rejected our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . allah indeed is severe in punishment .
they ask you about the hour : “ when will it be ? ”
how we made the grain to grow ,
and a man came running from the outer part of the city ; he said , “ o moosa ! indeed the court members are considering killing you , therefore go away – i surely am your well-wisher . ”
by the raging hurricanes ,
o followers of the book ! why do you dispute about ibrahim , when the taurat and the injeel were not revealed till after him ; do you not then understand ?
say :  think ye , if the punishment of allah comes to you , whether suddenly or openly , will any be destroyed except those who do wrong ?
and should they seek to deceive you , allah is sufficient for you . he it is who strengthened you with his succour and the believers
they will enter the gardens of eden wherein they will be decked with bracelets of gold , pearls , and silk garments .
he replied ,  you will not be able to have patience with me .
surely those who disbelieve from among the followers of the book and the polytheists shall be in the fire of hell , abiding therein ; they are the worst of men .
aliflaammeem .
let them then produce a recital like unto itif they are truthful .
and when it is said to them ,  spend from that which allah has provided for you ,  those who disbelieve say to those who believe ,  should we feed one whom , if allah had willed , he would have fed ? you are not but in clear error . 
qaf . by the glorious quran .
we do not abrogate a verse or cause it to be forgotten except that we bring forthbetter than it or similar to it . do you not know that allah is over all things competent ?
for those who do good there is good reward and more besides ; neither gloom nor humiliation shall cover their faces . they are the people of the garden and in it they shall abide .
say , “ shall i tell you of those who are in a worse position than this , in allah ’ s sight ? it is those whom allah has cursed and has wreaked his wrath upon and turned some of them into apes and swine , and worshippers of the devil ; theirs is a worse destination and they have wandered further astray from the straight path . ”
on that daywoe would be upon those who have rejected god 's revelations !
and the nearest of his kinsfolk who gave him shelter ,
the angels along with the spirit descend in it by the permission of their lord with all kinds of decrees .
we well know what they say , and you are not one to use force over them ; therefore advise him with the qur ’ an , whoever fears my threat .
o prophet ! when believing women come to you and pledge themselves not to associate in worship any other thing with god , not to steal or commit adultery or kill their children or indulge in slander , intentionally inventing falsehoods , and not to disobey you in that which is right , then accept their pledge of allegiance and pray to god to forgive them their sins , for god is forgiving and merciful .
in what statement , after this , will they believe ?
and narrate to them the story of noah when he said to his people : 'my people ! if my living in your midst and my effort to shake you out of heedlessness by reciting to you the revelations of allah offend you , then remember that i have put all my trust in allah . so draw up your plan in concert with those whom you associate with allah in his divinity , leaving no part of it obscure , and then put it into effect against me , and give me no respite .
it is he who multiplied you on the earth , and it will be before him that you will be gathered .
if god is your helper , no one can defeat you . however , if he abandons you , who would help you ? the true believers trust in god .
he had no authority over them save for the purpose of our knowing who believed in the world to come , and who doubted it . for your lord keeps a watch over everything .
know thou therefore that there is no god but god , and ask forgiveness for thy sin , and for the believers , men and women . god knows your going to and fro , and your lodging .
and thus proclaim the message !
and we raised him to an exalted station .
we admitted them to our mercy : for they were of the righteous ones .
when we revealed to your mother what was revealed ;
they stained his shirt with false blood . he said :  nay , but your minds have made up a talewith you , patience is most fitting : against that which ye assert , it is allahwhose help can be sought  ..
thus do we display our revelations that they may say :  thou hast studied ,  and that we may makeclear for people who have knowledge .
he said : o my people ! not with me is the error , but i am an apostle from the lord of the worlds .
so god will protect them from the evil of that day , and grant them happiness and joy ,
and those who have taken a mosque in opposition and unbelief , and to divide the believers , and as a place of ambush for those who fought god and his messenger aforetime -- they will swear 'we desired nothing but good ' ; and god testifies they are truly liars .
we admitted them to our mercy . they were all righteous men .
abraham was of the same faith :
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands forwarded ; and allah knows the harmdoers .
who will bring you every learned magician . 
whatever thing you are given is only the provision of this life . but what god possesses is better and more lasting for those who believe and rely on their lord .
because they set themselves against god and his messenger : god is stern in his punishment of anyone who sets himself against him .
these are the parables that we set forth to make people understand . but only those endowed with knowledge will comprehend them .
if a good befalls you , it grieves them , but if some evil overtakes you , they rejoice at it . but if you remain patient and become al-muttaqun , not the least harm will their cunning do to you . surely , allah surrounds all that they do .
and those who believe fight in the way of allah , but those who disbelieve fight in the way of the idol . therefore , fight against those guided by satan . indeed , satan 's guile is always weak .
he said , ‘ o my people ! tell me , should i stand on a manifest proof from my lord , and he has granted me his own mercy , who will protect me from allah should i disobey him ? for then you will increase me in nothing but loss .
did you not see that allah sent down water from the sky , so the earth became green at morn ? indeed allah is pure , aware .
so as to be ungrateful for the graces which we have bestowed on them . then enjoy ; but you will come to know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and the diversity of your tongues and colours . indeed there are signs in this for the wise .
by the bookwritten
but allah hath been gracious unto us and hath preserved us from the torment of the breath of fire .
and that which we have revealed to you , , of the book is the truth , confirming what was before it . indeed , allah , of his servants , is acquainted and seeing .
eventually we savedand his family , except his wife . we had decreed that she should be among those who would remain behind .
said firaun , “ so who is the lord of you both , o moosa ? ”
what ! is someone who fends off with his face the terrible punishmenton the day of resurrection… ? and the wrongdoers will be told , ‘ taste what you used to earn . ’
and the plants and the trees prostrate .
upon the day when he shall muster them all together , then he shall say to the angels , 'was it you these were serving ?
no , that is not the case ! rather , their hearts have been sullied by what they have been earning .
those were the people who were guided by god ; so follow their way . say :  i ask no recompense of you for this . it is but a reminder for all the people of the world . 
i would rather you bear my sin and your sin and become among the inhabitants of hell . such is the recompense of the harmdoers '
we have mentioned in this quran all kinds of examples for the human being , but most human beings turn away in disbelief .
or that he may not seize them by causing them to suffer gradual loss , for your lord is most surely compassionate , merciful .
say ,  whether you conceal what is in your breasts or reveal it , allah knows it . and he knows that which is in the heavens and that which is on the earth . and allah is over all things competent .
has there not come to you the story of those who disbelieved before , then tasted the evil result of their conduct , and they had a painful punishment ?
and we have set a wall before them and a wall behind them , and covered the top – so they are unable to see anything .
and the earth will throw up all her burdens ,
therein are fruits , date-palms producing sheathed fruit-stalks .
even so we recompense the good-doers ;
your sleeping during the night and in the day your seeking his favors are evidencefor the people who have hearing .
and do not approach the orphan 's property except in a way that is best until he reaches maturity . and give full measure and weight in justice . we do not charge any soul exceptits capacity . and when you testify , be just , even ifa near relative . and the covenant of allah fulfill . this has he instructed you that you may remember .
so they shall confess their sin . far away they-be , the fellows of the blaze !
and when a group among said , “ o people of medinah ! this is no place of stay for you , therefore go back to your homes ” ; and a group among them sought exemption from the prophet by saying , “ our homes are unprotected ” whereas their homes were not unprotected ; they willed nothing except to flee .
and we have removed resentment from their hearts – rivers will flow beneath them ; andthey will say , “ all praise is to allah , who guided us to this ; we would not have attained the right path if allah had not guided us ; indeed the noble messengers of our lord brought the truth ” ; and it is proclaimed , “ you have received this paradise as an inheritance for what you used to do . ”
and the hosts of iblis all together .
have they not travelled then on the earth so that they might see how hath been the end of those before them ! allah annihilated them . and for the infidels theirs shall be the like fate therefore .
and remember our servant job : when he cried to his lord : “ behold , satan has afflicted me with much hardship and suffering . ”
what aileth you that ye help not one another ?
if you follow a mortal like yourselves you will certainly be lost .
and , by allah ! i will certainly do something against your idols after you go away , turning back .
we have divided the qur'an into parts that you may recite it to men slowly , with deliberation . that is why we sent it down by degrees .
, exercise patience ; we have given them respite only for an appointed time .
and those who guard their private parts ,
but whoever goes beyond this is a transgressor ;
look they not at the camels , how they are created ?
if your lord had willed , all the people on the earth would have come to believe , one and all .
proofs have come unto you from your lord , so whoso seeth , it is for his own good , and whoso is blind is blind to his own hurt . and i am not a keeper over you .
the fire ; they shall be brought before itmorning and evening and on the day when the hour shall come to pass : make firon 's people enter the severest chastisement .
or take admonition , and the admonition would benefit him !
then the welcome will be boiling water
the father said :  shall i trust you with regard to him as i had trusted you earlier with regard to his brother ? allah is the best protector and is the most merciful . 
a brief enjoyment , and they will have a painful punishment .
until the day of a known time . 
as for the life of this world , it is nothing but a frolic and frivolity . the final abode is the best for those who are pious and fear god . do you not comprehend ?
seest thou not that allah makes the clouds move gently , then joins them together , then makes them into a heap ? - then wilt thou see rain issue forth from their midst . and he sends down from the sky mountain masseswherein is hail : he strikes therewith whom he pleases and he turns it away from whom he pleases , the vivid flash of his lightning well-nigh blinds the sight .
crystal of silver that they have measured -- very exactly .
and there werewhich you were unable to take . allah has encompassed it already , allah is powerful over all things .
and the moon as it follows it .
the day when every soul will come quarrelling against itself , and every soul will be fully repaid for what it did , and they will not be wronged .
seest thou not that the ships sail through the ocean by the grace of allah ? - that he may show you of his signs ? verily in this are signs for all who constantly persevere and give thanks .
they said , ‘ indeed you are one of the bewitched .
such is the creation of allah : now show me what is there that others besides him have created : nay , but the transgressors are in manifest error .
what , do you come to the males of the world ,
surely ibrahim was an exemplar , obedient to allah , upright , and he was not of the polytheists .
o you who believe ! do not befriend disbelievers rather than believers . do you want to give god a clear case against you ?
the pharaoh said ,  my people , i know no one who could be your lord besides myself . haman , construct for me a tower of baked bricks so that i may climb on it and see the god of moses ; i think he is a liar . 
it was naught but a single cry , and lo ! they were still .
or become reminded so that the reminder should profit him ?
and those in the fire will say to the keepersof hell :  call upon your lord to lighten for us the torment for a day ! 
and do not drive away those who invoke their lord in the morning and the evening , seeking his pleasure all the time . you are by no means accountable for them just as they are by no means accountable for you . if you still drive them away , you will become among the wrong-doers .
buthe tarried not far , and he said : i have encompassed that which thou hast- not encompassed , and i come unto thee from saba with a tidings sure .
and i adjusted affairs for him adjustably ;
today you possess no power to benefit or harm one another . we shall say to the wrongdoers ,  suffer the punishment of the fire that you persistently denied . 
recall what time his lord said unto him : submit , he said : i submit to the lord of the worlds .
and what aileth you that ye spend not in the way of allah when unto allah belongeth the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? those who spent and fought before the victory are not upon a level . such are greater in rank than those who spent and fought afterwards . unto each hath allah promised good . and allah is informed of what ye do .
remember when abraham said to his father , azar ,  do you take idols as your gods ? i see that you and your people have clearly gone astray . 
they said ,  by allah , you will not cease remembering joseph until you become fatally ill or become of those who perish . 
say , ‘ o people of the book ! why do you deny the signs of allah , while allah is witness to what you do ? ’
the lightning well-nigh snatcheth away their sight ; whensoever it flasheth on them , they walk therein , and when it becometh dark unto them , they stand still . and had allah willed he would of a surety have taken away their hearing and their sights ; verily allah is over everything potent .
they will excuse themselves to you when you go back to them . say : urge no excuse , by no means will we believe you ; indeed allah has informed us of matters relating to you ; and now allah and his apostle will see your doings , then you shall be brought back to the knower of the unseen and the seen , then he will inform you of what you did .
faces on that day will be radiant .
and they will not be mindful unless allah wishes . he is worthy ofbeing waryand he is worthy to forgive .
on the day when the heaven shall be as molten copper
there will be no good tidings for the guilty on the day they see the angels ; and they will cry out ,  keep away , keep away ! 
when they passed by them , they would wink at one another ;
my guardian is allah who has revealed the book , and it is he who protects the righteous .
verily , ibrahimwas , without doubt , forbearing , used to invoke allah with humility , and was repentant .
they have rejected the revelations of their lord and their meeting with him . thus , their deeds will be made devoid of all virtue and will be of no value on the day of judgment .
and also zakariyya and yahya and isa and llyas : each one was of the righteous .
and ismai ' l and alyas ' a and yunus and lut : each one of them we preferred above the worlds .
and we ordained for moses in the tablets all manner of admonition , and instruction concerning all things , and said to him : hold to these , with all your strength . and bid your people to follow them in accord with their best understanding . i shall soon show you the habitation of the wicked .
the pharaoh said to the people around him ,  he is certainly a skillful magician .
recite : in the name of thy lord who created ,
or by the moon when it is full ,
when the messengers lost all hopes and thought that they had been told lies , our help came to them : we saved whoever we pleased , but our punishment will not be averted from the guilty .
be he glorified . he is exalted , far above what they say .
anddwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselvesandbecome plain to you how we dealt with them and made examples for you ?
 be sure i will cut off your hands and your feet on apposite sides , and i will cause you all to die on the cross . 
and they shall be made to drink therein a cup the admixture of which shall be ginger ,
and if you find no one in them , do not enter them until you are given permission . and if it is said to you , “ turn back , ” then turn back . that is more proper for you . god is aware of what you do .
in fact , they say ,  we found our fathers following a certain belief and we now follow in their footsteps for our guidance  .
thus do we reward the good .
againnearer to you and nearer .
on couches facing one another ;
and the people of nuh before ; surely they were most unjust and inordinate ;
we will surely make the faithless taste a severe punishment , and we will surely requite them by the worst of what they used to do .
no fault it is in you if ye seek grace from your lord . then when ye hurry from arafat , remember allah near the sacred monument . remember him as he hath guided you , and ye were afore of the erring .
and by the moon when she is at the full ,
so none accepted faith in moosa , except a few descendants of his people , fearing firaun and his court members , that they would force them to revert ; and indeed firaun was a rebel in the land ; and indeed he crossed the limits .
doer of what he desires .
they came to this end because their messengers would come to them with clear signs and yet they would refuse to believe . so allah seized them . he is indeed strong , terrible in retribution .
he said , “ o my people ! is the pressure upon you from my relatives , worth more than allah ? and you put him * behind your backs ; indeed whatever you do is all within my lords ’ control . ”
ibrahimsaid :  but there is loutin it .  they said :  we know better who is there , we will verily save him ] and his family , except his wife , she will be of those who remain behind . 
‘ we do not descend except by the command of your lord . to him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is in between that , and your lord does not forget
 then travel by night with thy household , when a portion of the night , and do thou bring up the rear : let no one amongst you look back , but pass on whither ye are ordered . 
and among them are those who look at you . but can you guide the blind although they will notsee ?
and tell my bondmen to speak that which is the best ; undoubtedly satan sows discord among them ; indeed satan is man ’ s open enemy .
how woeful is the plight of him who has nothing except his face to shield him from severe chastisement on the day of resurrection ? such evil-doers shall be told : “ taste now the consequence of your deeds . ”
they are those whose works will be lost in this world and in the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
believers , have fear of allah and believe in his messenger , and he will grant you a two-fold portion of his mercy , and will appoint for you a light whereby you shall walk ; and he will forgive you . allah is most forgiving , most compassionate .
in this is a lesson for whoever fears .
and to median , their brother shuaib . he said , “ o my people , worship god and anticipate the last day , and do not spread corruption in the land . ”
we gave the book as an inheritance to our chosen servants , among whom some are unjust against their souls , some are moderate , and some are exceedingly virtuous by the permission of god . this is indeed a great favor .
the jews and the christians have asked the muslims to accept their faith to have the right guidance.tell them ,  we would rather follow the upright religion of abraham who was not a pagan  .
aaron 's sister , your father was not a bad man nor was your mother unchaste  .
they desire to extinguish with their mouths , the light of god ; but god will perfect his light , though the unbelievers be averse .
so they disputed over their affair among themselves and concealed their private conversation .
the only reward of those who make war upon allah and his noble messenger and cause turmoil in the land is that they be all be killed or crucified , or their hands and feet cut off from alternate sides , or they be banished far away from the land ; this is their degradation in the world , and for them in the hereafter is a great punishment .
a perception and an understanding , for every bondman who inclines .
they pursued what the devils falsely attributed to the kingdom of solomon . solomon was not an unbeliever : it is the devils who are unbelievers . they taught people witchcraft , and that which was sent down to harut and marut , the two angels in babylon . but these two taught no one until they had said ,  we are but a trial , therefore , do not disbelieve .  so men learnt from them that by which they caused discord between man and wife ; but they harmed no one thereby , except by the command of god ; , these people learned that which would harm them and do them no good , knowing full well that whoever acquiredwould have no share in the hereafter . evil indeed was thefor which they sold their souls , if only they had known it .
and remember our servants -- abraham , isaac and jacob -- they were endowed with great strength and vision .
and we have created you in pairs .
how many favours of your lord will you then deny ?
surely , this koran relates to the children of israel most of that which they are at variance .
he who created pairs of everything , and fashioned for you boats and beasts on which you ride ,
this community of yours is one community , and i am your lord ; so hold me alone in fear .
and fruits of the kind which they desire .
yea , woe to him ; how he plotted ! -
then we inspired you : “ follow the religion of abraham , the monotheist . he was not an idol-worshiper . ”
for the beggar and the destitute .
—those who are certain that they will encounter their lord and that they will return to him .
he who has been turned awayis turned away from it .
“ we never heard of this even in christianity , the latest religion ; this is clearly a newly fabricated matter . ”
so we delivered him and his family , except his wife . we ordained her to be among those who remained behind .
or do they say : he has forged it ? say : then bring a chapter like this and invite whom you can besides allah , if you are truthful .
for every soul there is a watcher .
surely we sent upon them a single cry , so they were like the dry fragments of trees which the maker of an enclosure collects .
or have we sent down authority to them , which points out to them the things to which they pay part-worship ?
even so we have sent it down as an arabic judgment . and if thou dost follow their caprices , after the knowledge that has come to thee , thou shalt have no protector against god , and no defender .
fight them ! allah will chastise them at your hands , and he will lay them low and give you victory over them , and he will heal the breasts of folk who are believers .
so leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about , until they meet their day which they are promised .
he grants hikmah to whom he pleases , and he , to whom hikmah is granted , is indeed granted abundant good . but none rememberexcept men of understanding .
aye ! they say : a medley of dreams ; aye ! he hath fabricated it ; aye ! he is a poet ; so let him bring us a sign even as the ancients were sent with .
except as a reminder for one who fears .
and the divorced women should keep themselves in waiting for three courses ; and it is not lawful for them that they should conceal what allah has created in their wombs , if they believe in allah and the last day ; and their husbands have a better right to take them back in the meanwhile if they wish for reconciliation ; and they have rights similar to those against them in a just manner , and the men are a degree above them , and allah is mighty , wise .
yet , in spite of this , your hearts only hardened like rocks or even harder , but among rocks are those from which rivers flow ; and there are also those which split open and water gushes forth ; as well as those that roll down for fear of god . and god is not negligent of all that you do .
he said , “ the truth is , and i say the truth .
and his hosts were mustered to solomon , jinn , men and birds , duly disposed ;
then raid by the dawn ,
nay , but it is a glorious qur'an .
if you invokethem , they hear not your call , and ifthey were to hear , they could not grant itto you . and on the day of resurrection , they will disown your worshipping them . and none can inform youlike him who is the allknower .
on unrolled parchment ,
for everyone there are ranks in accordance with what they have done ; and your lord is not oblivious of what they do .
say :  believe in itor do not believe . verily ! those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , fall down on their faces in humble prostration . 
save those who believe and do good works , and theirs is a reward unfailing .
the palm trees that you cut down or left standing intact was by god 's dispensation , so that he might disgrace the transgressors .
these are the signs of allah : we rehearse them to thee in truth : and allah means no injustice to any of his creatures .
in a well-guarded preserved book ,
they ask you :  when will the hour be ? when is its time fixed ? 
and if allah had pleased he would surely have made them a single community , but he makes whom he pleases enter into his mercy , and the unjust it is that shall have no guardian or helper .
and have in his mind no favour from anyone for which a reward is expected in return ,
lengthened shadows ,
and that “ we had thought that men and jinn would never speak a lie about allah ” ,
'eat and enjoy yourselves a little , for you are sinners '
and obey allah and his messenger , and dispute not one with another lest ye falter and your strength depart from you ; but be steadfast ! lo ! allah is with the steadfast .
when their messengers came to them from before them and behind them , : 'worship none except allah ' they answered : 'had it been the will of our lord , he would have sent down angels . so we disbelieve in the message with which you were sent '
all praise belongs to allah who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light . yet the faithless equatewith their lord .
do not stretch your eyes at the flower of this life which we have given couples to enjoy , it is with this that we might try them ; and the provision of yourlord is better , and more enduring .
and so those who were given knowledge may know that it is the truth from your lord andbelieve in it , and their hearts humbly submit to it . and indeed is allah the guide of those who have believed to a straight path .
save him upon whom god has mercy ; he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
this is the example of those who disbelieve in their lord : their works are like ashes upon which the wind blows fiercely on a tempestuous day . they shall find no reward for their deeds . that indeed is the farthest point in straying .
and whosoever hath been in this life blind will in the hereafter be blind , and far astray from the way .
leaving god they pray to those who can not harm or profit them . that is the limit of going astray .
they said :  if thou desist not , o lut ! thou wilt assuredly be cast out ! 
but if it weighs less , one will be lost forever in hell .
the unbelievers will say : 'lord , show us the jinn and people who led us astray , to put them under our feet so that they are among the lowest '
and remember our bondmen ibrahim , and ishaq , and yaqub – the men of power and knowledge .
and those who are in their testimonies upright
he said ,  nay , your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , he who created them : and i am a witness to this .
to god belongs all the secrets of the heavens and the earth . it only takes god a twinkling of an eye or even less to make it the day of judgment . god has power over all things .
and he had no group of men to help him against allah , nor could he defend or save himself .
prayer at night leaves the strongest impression on one 's soul and the words spoken are more consistent .
the approaching event has come near .
god has promised those that believe , and do deeds of righteousness ; they shall have ; forgiveness and a mighty wage .
enjoined i not on you , ye children of adam , that ye shall not worship the satan - verily he is unto you manifest foe .
he created man
all who dwell in heavens and on the earth submit to god alone , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the mornings and in the evenings .
certainly ! allah will admit those who believeand do righteous good deeds , to gardens under which rivers flow , while those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as cattle eat , and the fire will be their abode .
noble and recording ;
there shall be none besides allah to remove it .
and firon proclaimed amongst his people : o my people ! is not the kingdom of egypt mine ? and these rivers flow beneath me ; do you not then see ?
and ad and firon and lut 's brethren ,
fir'aunsaid :  and what is the lord of the 'alamin ? 
it is the star shing brightly .
and lean not toward those who do wrong , lest the fire should touch you , and ye have no protectors beside allah nor ye would then be succoured .
they said , ‘ o lot , we are messengers of your lord . they will never get at you . set out with your family in a watch of the night ; and none of you shall turn round , except your wife ; indeed she will be struck by what strikes them . indeed their tryst is the dawn . is not the dawnnear ? ’
and they were followed in thiswith a curse and on the day of resurrection . and wretched is the gift which is given .
indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of night and day , there are signs for those who possess intellect .
that ye shall indeed have all that ye choose ?
and recite to them the tiding of abraham
his accompanying devil said , “ our lord ! i did not cause him to rebel , but he himself was in extreme error . ”
we had in fact thought that men and jinns would never speak a lie about god ,
and bid thy family to pray , and be thou patient in it ; we ask of thee no provision , but it is we who provide thee and the issue ultimate is to godfearing .
and thamood , who hollowed the rocks in the valley ,
and the smooth runners
they have no regard for kinship or treaties with believers , for they are transgressors .
and when humanity is gathered , they will be enemies to them , and will renounce their worship of them .
and , verily , among those who followed his ] waywas ibrahim .
he it is who enables you to journey through the land and the sea . and so it happens that when you have boarded the ships and they set sail with a favourable wind , and the passengers rejoice at the pleasant voyage , then suddenly a fierce gale appears , and wave upon wave surges upon them from every side , and people believe that they are surrounded from all directions , and all of them cry out to allah in full sincerity of faith : 'if you deliver us from this we shall surely be thankful .
do you consider providing water to the pilgrims and tending the sacred mosque equal in worth to believing in allah and the last day and striving in the cause of allah ? the two are not equal with allah . allah does not direct the wrong-doing folk to the right way .
it is not for any prophet to take illegally a part of booty , and whosoever deceives his companions as regards the booty , he shall bring forth on the day of resurrection that which he took . then every person shall be paid in full what he has earned , - and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
have you not considered those who were told , “ restrain your hands , and perform your prayers , and spend in regular charity ” ? but when fighting was ordained for them , a faction of them feared the people as god is ought to be feared , or even more . and they said , “ our lord , why did you ordain fighting for us ? if only you would postpone it for us for a short while. ” say , “ the enjoyments of this life are brief , but the hereafter is better for the righteous , and you will not be wronged one bit . ”
say ,  everyone does as he wants . your lord knows best who has the right guidance . 
the hajj is during specific months . whoever decides to perform the hajj—there shall be no sexual relations , nor misconduct , nor quarrelling during the hajj . and whatever good you do , god knows it . and take provisions , but the best provision is righteousness . and be mindful of me , o people of understanding .
he who taught by the pen .
and complete the hajj and 'umrah for allah . but if you are prevented , thenwhat can be obtained with ease of sacrificial animals . and do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal has reached its place of slaughter . and whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the heada ransom of fastingor charity or sacrifice . and when you are secure , then whoever performs 'umrahfollowed by hajjwhat can be obtained with ease of sacrificial animals . and whoever can not find- then a fast of three days during hajj and of seven when you have returned . those are ten complete . this is for those whose family is not in the area of al-masjid al-haram . and fear allah and know that allah is severe in penalty .
a qur'an in arabic , without any crookedness : in order that they may guard against evil .
so he made them into fragments , except a large one among them , that they might return to it .
'joseph , thou true man , pronounce to us regarding seven fat kine , that seven lean ones were devouring , seven green ears of corn , and seven withered ; haply i shall return to the men , haply they will know . '
when the earth shakes off her burdens ,
what comes to you of good is verily from god ; and what comes to you of ill is from your own self . we have sent you as apostle to all mankind ; and god is sufficient as witness .
and , o my people ! let not the cleavage with me incite you so that there befall you the like of that which befell the people of nuh and the people of hud and the people of saleh ; and the people of lut are not from you far away .
do they associatethose who can create nothing ; rather , they are themselves created ?
and allah will establish the truth by his words , even if the criminals dislike it . 
shall i inform you upon whom the devils descend ?
he rulesaffairs from the heavens to the earth : in the end willgo up to him , on a day , the space whereof will bea thousand years of your reckoning .
and recall what time allah took a bond from the prophets saying whatever i vouchsafed unto you of book and wisdom , end , thereafter there cometh unto you an apostle confessing to that which is with you , ye shall surely believe in him and succour him . he said : assent ye , and take ye my burthen thereunto they said : we assent . he said : then bear witness , and i , with you among the witnesses .
pharaoh led his people astray ; he did not guide them aright .
and indeed there has come to them newswherein there isto check ,
therefore believe in god and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . and god is aware of the things you do .
the people of the town came along , revelling ,
they are exposed to the fire every morning and evening ; and when the last hour will come to pass , a command shall be given : “ admit the pharaonites to an even more severe chastisement . ”
he said : my lord ! lo ! in thee do i seek refugethat i should ask of thee that whereof i have no knowledge . unless thou forgive me and have mercy on me i shall be among the lost .
do you hope that they will believe in you , when some of them used to hear the word of god , and then deliberately distort it , even after understanding it ?
they carved out dwellings in the mountains , and lived in security --
do they not ponder over the qur'an ? had it been the word of any other but god they would surely have found a good deal of variation in it .
and appoint for me a minister from my family -
have you noted those who were prohibited from conspiring secretly , but then reverted to what they were prohibited from ? they conspire to commit sin , and aggression , and defiance of the messenger . and when they come to you , they greet you with a greeting that god never greeted you with . and they say within themselves , “ why does god not punish us for what we say ? ” hell is enough for them . they will roast in it . what a miserable destiny !
and indeed , i fear the successors after me , and my wife has been barren , so give me from yourself an heir
you shall surely see hell ;
they will then be told :  call upon those for help whom you declared to be our associates .  they will then call upon them but they will not answer them . they will have observed the chastisement in front of them . would that they were guided !
everything in the heavens and the earth praises god . to him belongs the kingdom , and to him all praise is due , and he is able to do all things .
the messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from his lord , as did the believers . they all have believed in god , and his angels , and his scriptures , and his messengers : “ we make no distinction between any of his messengers. ” and they say , “ we hear and we obey . your forgiveness , our lord . to you is the destiny . ”
mutterin among themselves : ye tarried not save ten days .
and fear the daywhen no person shall avail another , nor shall compensation be accepted from him , nor shall intercession be of use to him , nor shall they be helped .
you can not guide whomever you wish , butallahguides whomever he wishes , and he knows best those who are guided .
have ye seen that which ye cultivate ?
those who believe and migrated from their homes and fought for the way of allah , and those who have sheltered them and helped them they are truly the believers . theirs shall be forgiveness and a generous provision .
theysaid :  glory be to you , we have no knowledge except what you have taught us . verily , it is you , the all-knower , the all-wise . 
even if they saw lumps falling from heaven , they would say , ' a massed cloud ! '
so he punished them by putting hypocrisy into their hearts till the day whereon they shall meet him , because they broke thatwhich they had promised him and because they used to tell lies .
and said a muslim man from the people of firaun , who used to hide his faith , “ what ! you want to kill a man just because he says , ‘ allah is my lord ’ whereas he has indeed brought clear signs to you from your lord ? and supposedly if he is speaking wrongly , then the calamity of wrongful speech is upon him ; and if he is truthful , then part of what he promises you will reach you ; indeed allah does not guide any transgressor , excessive liar . ”
the flesh of them shall not reach god , neither their blood , but godliness from you shall reach him . so he has subjected them to you , that you may magnify god for that he has guided you . and give thou good tidings unto the good-doers .
only those wish to hasten it who believe not in it : those who believe hold it in awe , and know that it is the truth . behold , verily those that dispute concerning the hour are far astray .
he said , 'disguise her throne for her , and we shall behold whether she is guided or if she is of those that are not guided . '
or both male and female , and he leaves whoever he will barren ; he is all-knowing and all powerful .
then after it , your hearts hardened – so they are like rocks , or even harder ; for there are some rocks that rivers gush forth from them ; and some that water flows from them when they split asunder ; and there are rocks that fall down for the fear of allah ; and allah is not unaware of your deeds .
so the earthquake seized them , and they became within their homefallen prone .
that we may transfigure you and make you what ye know not .
we stand in ranks
surely , we shall help our messengers and the believers both in this world and on the day when the witnesses rise .
go thou and thy brother with my signs , and slacken not in remembrance of mine .
lord of the two easts , lord of the two wests ,
they are naught but names which you have named , you and your fathers ; allah has not sent for them any authority . they follow naught but conjecture and the low desires whichsouls incline to ; and certainly the guidance has come to them from their lord .
god has promised those who believe and do good deeds forgiveness and a great reward ;
perhaps allah will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . we have made gehennaa prison for the unbelievers .
when they are thrown in it , they hear it blaring , as it seethes ,
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
o ye who believe let not your riches or your children divert you from the remembrance of allah . and whosoever doth that then those ! they are the losers .
he reflected and then hatched a scheme .
they said ,  we only wish to eat therefrom to comfort our hearts , to know that you have spoken the truth to us , and to bear witness to it along with the others . 
we have certainly created man in the best of stature ;
to the indigent muhajirs , those who were expelled from their homes and their property , while seeking grace from allah andgood pleasure , and aiding allah and his messenger : such are indeed the sincere ones : -
then we sent our apostles one after another ; whenever there came to a people their apostle , they called him a liar , so we made some of them follow others and we made them stories ; so away with a people who do not believe !
yet they have assigned to him a part of his own servants ! man is dearly unthankful .
those who want to buy the life hereafter with this life should fight for the cause of god . we will give them a great reward whether they are killed or whether they are victorious .
they impugned him . so they will indeed be mustered
as for man , when his lord tests him by honoring him and favoring him , he says : 'my lord , has honored me '
is it you who make it grow , or are we the grower ?
he against whom the word of chastisement is realized -- shalt thou deliver him out of the fire ?
but warn them of the day of distress , when the matter will be determined : forthey are negligent and they do not believe !
and we have placed coverings on their hearts and a heaviness in their ears lest they understand it , and when you mention your lord alone in the quran they turn their backs in aversion .
that will destroy everything by the command of its lord. ” thereafter nothing was left to be seen except their dwellings . thus do we requite the wrong-doers .
moses said unto them : throw what ye are going to throw !
and moses chose from his people seventy men for our appointment . when they were seized with violent quaking , he prayed ,  o my lord ! if it had been your will , you could have destroyed both them and me long ago . but would you destroy us for the deeds of the foolish ones among us ? this is no more than your trial : by it you cause whom you will to stray , and you lead whom you will to the right path . you are our protector . forgive us , therefore , and have mercy on us , for you are the best of those who forgive .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you and the believers who follow you .
hath he knowledge of the unseen so that he seeth ?
so allah shall guard them against the woe of that day , and will procure them freshness and joy ,
recount to them the example of the people to whose town our messengers came .
are these the ones that you swore god would never reach with mercy ? ' 'enter paradise ; no fear upon you , nor shall you sorrow .
you shall see them exposed before it , humbled in shame and looking upon it with a furtive glance and the believers will say : 'indeed , the losers are they who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection ' the harmdoers shall suffer an everlasting punishment .
we have appointed only angels to be wardens of the fire , and their number have we made to be a stumbling-block for those who disbelieve ; that those to whom the scripture hath been given may have certainty , and that believers may increase in faith ; and that those to whom the scripture hath been given and believers may not doubt ; and that those in whose hearts there is disease , and disbelievers , may say : what meaneth allah by this similitude ? thus allah sendeth astray whom he will , and whom he will he guideth . none knoweth the hosts of thy lord save him . this is naught else than a reminder unto mortals .
and i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed :
this is but one of the mighty ,
do not give those who are of immature mind your property which god has granted you as a means of support : make provision for them out of it , and clothe them , and give them good advice .
when they entered unto him , saying 'peace ! ' he said 'peace ! you are a people unknown to me . '
and thy lord is not one to destroy cities wrongously while the inhabitants thereof are rectifiers .
and know that your property and your children are a temptation , and that allah is he with whom there is a mighty reward .
when we give him a taste of some of our mercy , after some adversity has touched him , he is sure to say ,  this is my due . i do not think that the hour is going to come . and even if i return to my lord , he will surely reward me well .  but truly we shall tell those who deny the truththat they did , and shall make them suffer a hard punishment .
as for him who sets himself against the messenger and follows a path other than that of the believers even after true guidance had become clear to him , we will let him go to the way he has turned to , and we will cast him into hell - an evil destination .
joseph said ,  place in my charge the storehouses of the land ; for i am a good and knowledgeable custodian . 
and we task not any soul except according to its capacity , and with us is a book speaking with truth , and they will not be wronged .
so we put them to sleep in the cave for several years .
test the orphans when they reach the age of marriage . then if you discern in them maturity , deliver to them their property . and do not consume it lavishly and hastily lest they should grow up . as for him who is well-off , let him be abstemious , and as for him who is poor , let him eat in an honourable manner . and when you deliver to them their property , take witnesses over them , and allah suffices as reckoner .
or thou causest the heaven to fall upon us , as thou assertest , in pieces , or thou bringest god and the angels face to face .
of a truth ye are strongerbecause of the terror in their hearts , by allah . this is because they are men devoid of understanding .
and the heavens , how it was raised high ;
o believers , betray not god and the messenger , and betray not your trusts and that wittingly ;
allah commands you as regards your children 's ; to the male , a portion equal to that of two females ; ifonly daughters , two or more , their share is two thirds of the inheritance ; if only one , her share is half . for parents , a sixth share of inheritance to each if the deceased left children ; if no children , and the parents are theheirs , the mother has a third ; if the deceased left brothers or , the mother has a sixth.after the payment of legacies he may have bequeathed or debts . you know not which of them , whether your parents or your children , are nearest to you in benefit , are ordained by allah . and allah is ever all-knower , all-wise .
do not marry idolatresses , until they believe ; a believing slavegirl is better than an idolatress , though you may admire her . and do not marry idolaters , until they believe . a believing slave is better than an idolater , though you may admire him . those call unto the fire ; and god calls unto paradise , and pardon , by his leave , and he makes clear his signs to the people ; haply they will remember .
people , eat of the good and lawful things on earth . do not follow the footsteps of satan ; he is clearly your enemy .
allah , there is no god but he : he is the lord of mighty power .
such are on guidance from their lord , and such are the successful .
 so if you turn away , still i have conveyed the message with which i was sent to you . my lord will make another people succeed you , and you will not harm him in the least . surely , my lord is guardian over all things . 
“ o my people , enter the holy land which god has assigned for you , and do not turn back , lest you return as losers . ”
on that day we shall assemble together a host from every community of those who cried lies to our revelations and they will be grouped
and indeed we created the heavens and the earth and all between them in six days and nothing of fatigue touched us .
and do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them , and for you . killing them is a grave sin .
so turn your attention away from them ; you shall incur no blame .
they said :  we did not break our promise to you of our own will , but we were made to carry the loads of ornaments belonging to the people , which we threw , and so did sameri .
do not marry idolatresses , unless they have believed . a believing maid is better than an idolatress , even if you like her . and do not marry idolaters , unless they have believed . a believing servant is better than an idolater , even if you like him . these call to the fire , but god calls to the garden and to forgiveness , by his leave . he makes clear his communications to the people , that they may be mindful .
of them you may put off any of them you wish , and you may take any of them whom you wish , and you may call back any of those whom you hadset aside : there will be no blame on you . it is likelier that they will thus be comforted , and will not grieve , and every one of them will be well-pleased with what you give them . allah knows what is in your hearts . allah is all-knowing , all-forbearing .
and we have commended unto man kindness toward parents . his mother beareth him with reluctance , and bringeth him forth with reluctance , and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months , till , when he attaineth full strength and reacheth forty years , he saith : my lord ! arouse me that i may give thanks for the favour wherewith thou hast favoured me and my parents , and that i may do right acceptable unto thee . and be gracious unto me in the matter of my seed . lo ! i have turned unto thee repentant , and lo ! i am of those who surrender .
if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they will say , 'god . ' say : 'what think you ? that you call upon apart from god -- if god desires affliction for me , shall they remove his affliction ? or if he desires mercy for me , shall they withhold his mercy ? ' say : 'god is enough for me ; in him all those put their trust who put their trust . '
this is what the extent of their knowledge amounts to . your lord knows best who has gone astray from his path and who has been rightly guided .
or , have they gods who can defend them against us ? they shall not be able to assist themselves , nor shall they be defended from us .
can it happen that he who takes his stand on a clear evidence from his lord , subsequently followed by a witness from him , and prior to that the book of moses was revealed as a guide and a mercy , ? rather , such men are bound to believe in it . the fire shall be the promised resort of the groups that disbelieve . so be in no doubt about it for this indeed is the truth from your lord although most people do not believe .
and allah has said ,  do not take for yourselves two deities . he is but one god , so fear only me . 
the hypocrites apprehend lest a surah should be revealed unto them declaring unto them that which is in their hearts . say thou : mock on ! verily allah is about to bring out that which ye apprehend .
no indeed ! he has not yet carried out what he has commanded him .
there are some of them who blame you regardingthe charities : if they are given from them , they are pleased , but if they are not given from them , behold , they are displeased .
lo ! those who believe and do good works , theirs will be gardens underneath which rivers flow . that is the great success .
or , have you an oath from us that stretches to the day of resurrectionyou shall surely have what you judge !
to thosecommunities - some of whose stories we relate to you - there had indeed come messengers with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had once rejected as false . thus it is that allah seals the hearts of those who deny the truth .
behold ye not in what wise allah hath created seven heavens in storeys .
if allah had so willed , he could have made them a single people ; but he admits whom he will to his mercy ; and the wrong-doers will have no protector nor helper .
o you who wraps himself ,
place on it high mountains and provide you with fresh water ?
and landmarks ; and they are guided by the star .
your creation and resurrection is but like that of a single cell . verily he is all-hearing and all-seeing .
 this is the fire which you used to deny .
o ye who believe ! let your slaves , and those of you who have not come to puberty , ask leave of you at three times : before the prayer of dawn , and when ye lay aside your raiment for the heat of noon , and after the prayer of night . three times of privacy for you . it is no sin for them or for you at other times , when some of you go round attendant upon others . thus allah maketh clear the revelations for you . allah is knower , wise .
and in the succession of night and day , and in the means of subsistence which god sends down from the skies , giving life thereby to the earth after it had been lifeless , and in the circulation of the winds : there are signs for people who use their reason .
he said : i am better than he ; thou hast created me of fire , and him thou didst create of dust .
“ you merge the night into the day , and you merge the day into the night ; and you bring the living out of the dead , and you bring the dead out of the living ; and you provide for whom you will without measure . ”
who used to say , “ are you of those who believe ?
allah is my lord and your lord ; therefore , serve him . that is the straight way . ”
and when it is recited to them , they say ,  we have believed in it ; indeed , it is the truth from our lord . indeed we were , before it , muslims . 
as one who calls people to allah by his leave , and as a bright , shining lamp .
and a man came running from the remotest part of the city . he said : o musa ! surely the chiefs are consulting together to slay you , therefore depart ; surely i am of those who wish well to you .
but for god 's bounty to you and his mercy and that god is all-gentle , all-compassionate --
they will say : 'then we are returned lost '
and marry not women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed ; indeed it was shameful and most hateful , and an evil way .
: ' i am only ordered to worship the lord of this country , which he has made sacred , everything belongs to him . and i am ordered to be of the muslims ,
your people have denied it even though it is the truth . say :  i am not a guardian over you .
they worship such , beside allah , which neither harms them nor benefits them ; this only is the extreme error .
soon thereafter one of the two women came to him , walking bashfully , and said :  my father invites you that he may reward you for your having watered our flocks for us.  when moses came to him and narrated to him the whole of his story , he said :  have no fear . you are now safe from the iniquitous people . 
when they are told to follow thethat god has sent down , they say ,  no , we shall follow the ways that we found our fathers .  yes ! even though satan is inviting them to the punishment of the burning fire ?
and was at a distance of two bow lengths or nearer .
protect them from evil ; and whosoever you preserve from evil on that day shall have surely received your mercy . this will be the great triumph . 
and some of the bedouins who dwell around you are hypocrites ; and some of the people of the city are grown bold in hypocrisy . thou knowest them not ; but we know them , and we shall chastise them twice , then they will be returned to a mighty chastisement .
what are the people waiting for ? for the angels to come down , or your lord to appear , or some signs from your lord ? the day when certain signs appear from your lord , the embracing of faith shall not be of any avail to one who did not come to belief at first , or who did not perform good deeds by virtue of his faith . tell them :  wait on , we are waiting too . 
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down provision for you from heaven ; but none pays heed except the repentant .
and when the pages are laid open ,
i swear by that which ye see .
indeed all disbelievers , the people of the book and the polytheists , are in the fire of hell – they will remain in it for ever ; it is they who are the worst among the creation .
if there are some among you who believe in that which i have been sent and others who disbelieve it , be patient until allah shall judge between us . he is the best of judges '
why did they not bring four witnesses to it ? so when they could not bring the witnesses , they are liars in allah ’ s sight .
but certainly whoever keeps his promise and follows the right path , for god loves those who shun evil and follow the right course .
when abraham saw the rising moon , he said ,  this is my lord .  but when it faded away , he said ,  if my lord does not guide me i shall certainly go astray . 
seest thou not how allah coineth a similitude : a goodly saying , as a goodly tree , its root set firm , its branches reaching into heaven ,
we told him ,  this is our gift to you so give them away free or keep them as you like  .
have you not seen the people who have received a part of revelation who are called to the book of god that it may judgebetween them ? but some , being averse turn away ,
have you feared to present before your consultation charities ? then when you do not and allah has forgiven you , thenestablish prayer and give zakah and obey allah and his messenger . and allah is acquainted with what you do .
and when our manifest revelations are rehearsed unto them , those who disbelieve say unto those who believe : which of the two portions is better in station and goodlier in company ? * chapter : 19
have you not heard the news of those before you who disbelieved ? they tasted the mischief of their action , and for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when every person will be confronted with all the good he has done , and all the evil he has done , he will wish that there were a great distance between him and his evil . and allah warns you against himselfand allah is full of kindness to theslaves .
we revealed itas a code of conduct in the arabic language . , if you follow their desires after the knowledge has been revealed to you , know that no one will be able to guard or protect you from the wrath of god .
that he may pay them their hires in full and increase unto them of his grace ; verily , he is forgiving , appreciative .
nor is it the speech of a soothsayer ; how little do you ponder !
the day on which you will turn back retreating ; there shall be no savior for you from allah , and whomsoever allah causes to err , there is no guide for him :
and when it is said unto him : be careful of thy duty to allah , pride taketh him to sin . hell will settle his account , an evil resting-place .
when their brother hud said to them : will you not guard ?
he who taughtthe pen , -
surely we have placed chains on their necks , and these reach up to their chins , so they have their heads raised aloft .
say : my lord has enjoined justice , and set upright your faces at every time of prayer and call on him , being sincere to him in obedience ; as he brought you forth in the beginning , so shall you also return .
: 'set out with my worshipers in the night , for you will surely be followed .
allah has made your houses a repose , and has provided you with the skins of the cattle for your habitation which are light to handle both when you travel and when you camp ; and out of their wool and their fur and their hair he has given you furnishings and goods for use over a period of time .
they said : woe unto us ! verily we have been wrong-doers .
he said :  worship you that which youcarve ?
whatever good they do , they will not be denied it . god knows the righteous .
say : ' i demand of you no wage for this except for he who wishes to take the path to his lord '
then remind them ! thou art only a reminder ;
indeed those who turn faithless and die while they are faithless , a world of gold will not be accepted from any of them should he offer it for ransom . for such there will be a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
that is because you took the verses of allah in ridicule , and worldly life deluded you .  so that day they will not be removed from it , nor will they be asked to appease .
and to 'ad we sent forth their brother hud . he said : ' o my people ! serve allah ; you have no other god than him . will you , then , not avoid evil ? '
it is he who sendeth down rain from the skies : with it we produce vegetation of all kinds : from some we produce green , out of which we produce grain , heaped up ; out of the date-palm and its sheaths clusters of dates hanging low and near : andgardens of grapes , and olives , and pomegranates , each similaryet different : when they begin to bear fruit , feast your eyes with the fruit and the ripeness thereof . behold ! in these things there are signs for people who believe .
behold , how they strike similitudes for thee , and go astray , and are unable to find a way !
and those who answer the call of their lord and establish worship , and whose affairs are a matter of counsel , and who spend of what we have bestowed on them ,
and when it is said unto them : what hath your lord revealed ? they say : fables of the men of old ,
when he ran away to a ship completely laden ,
and i do not ask you any reward for it ; my reward is only with the lord of the worlds ;
and lo ! the wicked verily will be in hell ;
that is because they accepted faith with their tongues then disbelieved with their hearts , therefore their hearts were sealed – so now they do not understand anything .
man is created of haste , i will show you my ayat . so ask me not to hasten .
this is a warner , of thewarners of old !
verily unto us is their reckoning .
in a high garden .
excepting the household of lot . we shall deliver all of them ,
your ways are like the ways of those who have gone before you . they were mightier than you in power , and more abundant in riches and children . they enjoyed their lot for a while as you have enjoyed your lot , and you also engaged in idle talk as they did . their works have come to naught in this world , and in the hereafter they are surely the losers .
and when there came to them the truth they said : this is magic , and surely we are disbelievers in it .
save those on whom allah shall have mercy ; surely he is the mighty the merciful .
that which is on earth we have made but as a glittering show for the earth , in order that we may test them - as to which of them are best in conduct .
those who bear the throne and those who are round about it , hallow the praise of their lord and believe in him and ask forgiveness for those who believe , saying : our lord ! thou comprehendest everything in mercy and knowledge , wherefore forgive these who repent and follow thine path , and protect them from the torment of the flaming fire .
and for solomon the wind—its outward journey was one month , and its return journey was one month . and we made a spring of tar flow for him . and there were sprites that worked under him , by the leave of his lord . but whoever of them swerved from our command , we make him taste of the punishment of the inferno .
and belied the day of recompense
tell them the true story of the two sons of adam . each one of them offered a sacrifice . god accepted the sacrifice of one of thembut not that of the otherwho then said to his brother ,  i shall certainly kill you .  replied ,  god only accepts the offerings of the pious ones .
truly he succeeds that purifies it ,
whatever palm trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by god 's leave , so that he might disgrace the transgressors .
for divorced women a provision in kindness : a duty for those who ward off .
and we have certainly established you upon the earth and made for you therein ways of livelihood . little are you grateful .
so we were showing abraham the kingdom of the heavens and earth , that he might be of those having sure faith .
chastising whom he will , and having mercy on whomsoever he will , and unto him you shall be turned .
think not that those who rejoice in what they have done , and love to be praised for what they have not done , - think not you that they are rescued from the torment , and for them is a painful torment .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
questions are asked about the baby girls buried alive ,
verily we ! we have given thee kauthar .
 he has aided you with cattle and children .
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his council , and he said : ' i am the messenger of the lord of the worlds '
and if they had believed and feared allah , then the reward from allah would have beenbetter , if they only knew .
“ lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them – the almighty , the oft forgiving . ”
therefore woe to those who disbelieve because of their day which they are threatened with .
whenever we replace one verse by another verse - and allah knows what he should reveal - they are wont to say :  you are nothing but a fabricator .  the fact is that most of them are ignorant of the truth .
they deny the hour . for those who deny that hour , we have prepared a blazing fire .
he will look down and see him in hell .
and when the son of mary was cited as an example , your people opposed .
as such we make plain our verses in order that they return .
when the sky is torn apart ,
had he not been one of those who glorify allah ,
on luxurious furnishings .
it will not be lightened for them , and they will be despondent in it .
and we left there a sign for such as fear the grievous penalty .
“ and do not contort your cheek while talking to anyone , nor boastfully walk upon the earth ; indeed allah does not like any boastful , haughty person . ”
this indeed is what is taught in the former scriptures --
reclining therein , calling therein for many fruits and drink .
instead of god they worship what neither harms nor benefits them , and they say :  these are our intercessors with god .  say ,  do you inform god about something in heavens and on earth that he does not know ? glory be to him ; may he be exalted over whatever they associate ! 
we brought you the truth but most of you disliked it  .
the terrible calamity !
and if they disobey you , then say ,  indeed , i am disassociated from what you are doing . 
truly the rising by night is most potent for governing , and most suitable forthe word .
say ,  have you thought about those you call upon apart from god ? show me what they have created on the earth . or do they have a share in the heavens ? bring me a book revealed before this or some other vestige of knowledge , if you are telling the truth .
 o yusuf ! turn away from this ! ask forgiveness for your sin . verily , you were of the sinful . 
indeed , the people of paradise will be busy enjoying themselves :
therein is fruit and date-palms , producing spathes ;
say : ' o my people who have been prodigal against yourselves , do not despair of god 's mercy ; surely god forgives sins altogether ; surely he is the all-forgiving , the all-compassionate .
and the people of ibrahim and the people of lut ,
when the sky is split ,
and when it is said to them , “ spend in allah ’ s cause , from what allah has provided you ” , the disbelievers say regarding the believers , “ shall we feed these , whom if allah willed , would have fed ? you are not but in open error ! ”
should two among you commit it , chastise them both ; but if they repent and reform , let them alone . indeed allah is all-clement , all-merciful .
to him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth : how can he have a son when he hath no consort ? he created all things , and he hath full knowledge of all things .
they will have maidens with large , lovely black and white eyes ,
if thou punish them , lo ! they are thy slaves , and if thou forgive them . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
thus we returned him to his mother , that she may be comforted , and not grieve , and know that god ’ s promise is true . but most of them do not know .
they said ,  no harm . indeed , to our lord we will return .
those to whom we have given the book know it distinctly as they know their sons ; but those who are lost of soul do not believe .
who , ignoring the reality , engage in pleasantries .
verily this is the word of a noble message-bearer ;
and musa said : o my people ! if you believe in allah , then rely on himif you submit .
and when it is said to them , what is it that your lord has revealed ? they say : stories of the ancients ;
and give unto orphans their property and do not exchangebad things forgood ones ; and devour not their substanceto your substance . surely , this is a great sin .
he said , “ my lord , i have wronged myself , so forgive me. ” so he forgave him . he is the forgiver , the merciful .
we know indeed what the earth diminishes of them , and with us is a writing that preserves .
they are dead , not alive ; and they do not know when they will be resurrected .
such are the true believers . they have a high standing with their lord , his forgiveness and an honourable provision made for them .
god has appointed for you of yourselves wives , and he has appointed for you of your wives sons and grandsons , and he has provided you of the good things . what , do they believe in vanity , and do they disbelieve in god 's blessing ?
we sent noah and abraham , and gave prophethood to their progeny and the book , and some of them are well-directed , but many of them are disobedient .
 and construct the ship under our eyes and with our inspiration , and address me not on behalf of those who did wrong ; they are surely to be drowned . 
, do not move your tongue too fast in your attempt to learn this revelation :
if you count the blessings of allah , you will never number them . indeed , the human is wicked and thankless .
we destroyed the generations before you when they did evil , and their messengers came to them with the clear signs , but they would not believe ; so we recompense the people of the sinners .
and the thamud , the people of lot , as well as the dwellers of the wood , had denied . these were the hordes .
and lo ! the judgment will indeed befall .
but they cried him lies ; then there seized them the chastisement of the day of shadow ; assuredly it was the chastisement of a dreadful day .
when the wife of 'imran said : 'lord , i have vowed to you in dedication that which is hidden inside me . accept this from me . you are the hearer , the knower '
and when satan decked out their deeds fair to them , and said , 'today no man shall overcome you , for i shall be your neighbour . ' but when the two hosts sighted each other , he withdrew upon his heels , saying , ' i am quit of you ; for i see what you do not see . i fear god ; and god is terrible in retribution . '
in their hearts is a disease , so allah hath increased unto them that disease ; and unto them shall be a torment afflictive , for they have been lying .
and when at the time of fighting he made the disbelievers seem few to you , and you as few in their sight , in order for allah to conclude the matter that must be done ; and towards allah is the return of all matters .
they think that the confederate tribes have not yet gone . if the confederate tribes were to attack them , they would have wished to be left alone among the bedouin arabs where they would only follow the news about you . even if they were with you , only a few of them would take part in the fight .
other people before you enquired about such things , but when they were disclosed to them , they refused to carry them out .
those whose effort goeth astray in the life of the world , and yet they reckon that they do good work .
and we indeed sent down clear verses ; and allah may guide whomever he wills to the straight path .
pharaoh and those before him and the people of the overturned habitations all engaged in the same great sin .
and whoever repents and does good deeds – so he has inclined towards allah with repentance as was required .
to inherit me , and inherit from the house of jacob , and make him , my lord , pleasing . ”
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them together .
believers , recall god 's favors to you when a group of people were about to harm you and god made their evil plots against you fail . have fear of god . believers , only trust in god .
but your peoplehave denied itthough it is the truth . say :  i am not responsible for your affairs . 
he said , 'adam , tell them their names . ' and when he had told them their names he said , 'did i not tell you i know the unseen things of the heavens and earth ? and i know what things you reveal , and what you were hiding . '
they said , ‘ put him and his brother off for a while , and send heralds to the cities ,
and those who have disbelieved say ,  you are not a messenger .  say , ,  sufficient is allah as witness between me and you , andwhoever has knowledge of the scripture . 
throw down your staff .  but when he saw it moving like a snake , he turned and fled .  moses , do not be afraid ! the messengers need have no fear in my presence ;
he said , “ get down from it ! it is not for you to act arrogantly in it . get out ! you are one of the lowly ! ”
nay , but the unbelievers still cry lies ,
 here you shall not go hungry or be naked ,
did he not find thee wandering and direct ?
or is it that they have the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the mighty , the great giver ?
if you ask them , ‘ who created the heavens and the earth , and who has disposed the sun and the moon ? ’ they will surely say , ‘ allah. ’ then where do they stray ?
your lord did not want to destroy the towns , unjustly , without informing their inhabitants .
pharaoh turned away , put together his plan , and then came back .
this is the extent of their knowledge ; indeed your lord well knows one who has strayed from his path , and he well knows one who has attained guidance .
had we pleased we could have raised a warner in every town .
and that my penalty will be indeed the most grievous penalty .
indeed he reflected and decided .
present to them the example of the life of this world so like the water we send down from the skies that mingles with the earth to nourish its vegetation , which then on the morrow turns to stubble and is blown away by the wind . god has power over everything .
call upon those you claim to be deities besides god and you will know that they have no power to remove affliction from you or to bring about any change .
a recompense from thy lord-a gift sufficient -
and praise be to him in the heavens and on the earth , and glorify him in the late afternoon , and at midday .
and surely i take refuge with my lord and your lord that you should stone me to death :
 as to those who reject faith , i will punish them with terrible agony in this world and in the hereafter , nor will they have anyone to help . 
andthe camels , we have made them of the signs of the religion of allah for you ; for you therein is much good ; therefore mention the name of allah on them as they stand in a row , then when they fall down eat of them and feed the poor man who is contented and the beggar ; thus have we made them subservient to you , that you may be grateful .
except the one who will go into the blazing fire .
turned to dust , floating in the air ,
the reckoning of those whose book of records will be given into their right hands
of all these apostles we have favoured some over the others . god has addressed some of them , and the stations of some have been exalted over the others . and to jesus , son of mary , we gave tokens , and reinforced him with divine grace . if god had so willed those who came after them would never have contended when clear signs had come to them . but dissensions arose , some believed , some denied . and if god had willed they would never have fought among themselves . but god does whatsoever he please .
but when these months , prohibited , are over , slay the idolaters wheresoever you find them , and take them captive or besiege them , and lie in wait for them at every likely place . but if they repent and fulfil their devotional obligations and pay the zakat , then let them go their way , for god is forgiving and kind .
to your lord , that day , will be the procession .
this - let them taste it : scalding water and corruption .
and we guided them upon the straight path .
they say ,  it is just fables of the ancients , which he has had written down . they are dictated to him morning and evening . 
hast thou not seen those who pretend that they believe in that which is revealed unto thee and that which was revealed before thee , how they would go for judgmentto false deities when they have been ordered to abjure them ? satan would mislead them far astray .
surely most of those who call out to you , , from behind the apartments , are devoid of understanding .
say : who provideth for you from the sky and the earth , or who owneth hearing and sight ; and who bringeth forth the living from the dead and bringeth forth the dead from the living ; and who directeth the course ? they will say : allah . then say : will ye not then keep your duty ?
what , does he think none has seen him ?
remember also our servant job ; when he called to his lord , 'behold , satan has visited me with weariness and chastisement . '
such is the punishment , but truly , the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they but knew .
say ,  i have received enough authoritative evidence from my lord but you have rejected it . whateverand that which you insist on to experience without delay , is not in my hands . thejudgment is in the hands of god . he reveals the truth and he is the best judge .
and he it is who accepts repentance from his servants and pardons the evil deeds and he knows what you do ;
those who stay away from grave sins and indecencyfor their trivial sins your lord 's forgiveness is vast . he knows best about you . when he created you from the earth and when you were embryos in your mother 's wombs . do not consider yourselves very great . god knows best who is the most righteous person .
those who have faith in allah and his apostles—it is they who are the truthful and witnesses with their lord ; they shall have their reward and their light . but as for those who are faithless and deny our signs , they shall be the inmates of hell .
and that to your lord is the finality .
“ we will indeed cause a punishment from the sky to descend upon the inhabitants of this town – the recompense of their disobedience . ”
they seek to extinguish the light of allah with their mouths ; and allah refuseth to do otherwise than perfect his light , although the infidels may detest .
said he , 'my lord , for thy perverting me i shall deck all fair to them in the earth , and i shall pervert them , all together ,
and if you were to call them to true guidance , they will not hear ; and you observe them looking at you whereas they have no power to see . '
the thamudrejectedthrough their inordinate wrong-doing ,
o people of the book , why do you disbelieve the signs of god having witnessed them yourselves ?
they swear unto you , that ye may accept them . though ye accept them . allah verily accepteth not wrongdoing folk .
and allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse ,
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
wherefore did they not bring four witnesses thereof ? then when they brought not the witnesses , those ! with allah they are the liars .
men receive a share of what their parents and relatives leave , and women receive a share of what their parents and relatives leave ; be it little or much—a legal share .
and for you in them isbeauty when you bring them inand when you send them out .
we sent noah to his people , and he stayed among them for a thousand years minus fifty years . then the deluge swept them ; for they were wrongdoers .
he asks : when is the day of resurrection ?
most of their secret conferrings are devoid of good , unless one secretly enjoins in charity , good deeds , and setting the affairs of men right . we shall grant who ever does that seeking to please allah a great reward .
a people before you questioned concerning them , then disbelieved in them .
your lord knows best what is in your minds ; if you are good , then he is surely forgiving to those who turnfrequently .
how many of the followers of the books having once known the truth desire in their hearts , out of envy , to turn you into infidels again even after the truth has become clear to them ! but you forbear and overlook till god fulfil his plan ; and god has power over all things .
we admonished each one of them by citing the examplesand ultimately annihilated all of them .
shall we be recompensed for our deeds after we die and become bones and dust ?
they were therefore defeated here and they turned back humiliated .
o mankind , follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow other administrators , abandoning this ; very little do you understand .
their messengers replied ,  we are indeed mortals like yourselves . but god bestows his grace on such of his servants as he chooses . we can not give you miracles , except by god 's leave . in god let true believers put their trust --
but they will not wish for it , ever , because of what their hands have put forth . and allah is knowing of the wrongdoers .
allah has certainly made lawful for you the dissolution of your oaths , and allah is your master and he is the all-knowing , the all-wise .
and between the two there shall be a veil , and on the most elevated places there shall be men who know all by their marks , and they shall call out to the dwellers of the garden : peace be on you ; they shall not have yet entered it , though they hope .
beware a day whereon each soul will come pleading for itself , and each soul will be paid in full that which it hath wrought , and they shall not be wronged .
o you who believe ! approach not as-salatwhen you are in a drunken state until you knowof what you utter , nor when you are in a state of janaba , except when travelling on the road , till you wash your whole body . and if you are ill , or on a journey , or one of you comes after answering the call of nature , or you have been in contact with womenand you find no water , perform tayammum with clean earth and rub therewith your faces and hands . truly , allah is ever oft-pardoning , oft-forgiving .
they answered :  we did not break our promise with you out of our own volition ; but we were laden with the load of people 's ornaments , and we simply threw them down , and the samiri also threw down something ,
pharaoh said ,  have you come to believe in him , before i have given you permission ? he is surely your master who has taught you magic . but you shall see . i will cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides and crucify you all . 
even so we recompense the good-doers ;
and thatthose who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
then afterward allah will relent toward whom he will ; for allah is forgiving , merciful .
it is allah only , who is the creator , the initiator , the designer of all – his only are all the good names ; all whatever is in the heavens and in the earth proclaims his purity ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
andqarun , fir'aun , and haman . and indeed musacame to them with clear ayat , but they were arrogant in the land , yet they could not outstrip us .
o human , you are working hard towards your lord and you will meet him .
it has been sent down by the lord of all the worlds .
the sun and the moon move according to plan .
and they swear by allah with the most energetic of their oaths : allah will not raise up him who dies . yea ! it is a promise binding on him , quite true , but most people do not know ;
satan made adam and his spouse err and caused them to abandon the state in which they had been living . then we said ,  descend , you are each other 's enemies ! the earth will be a dwelling place for you and it will provide you with sustenance for an appointed time .
and of the satans were some who dove for him , and worked a work beside that ; and of them we were the watchers .
nay , itwill come upon them all of a sudden and will perplex them , and they will have no power to avert it , nor will they get respite .
and decree for us in this worldgood andin the hereafter ; indeed , we have turned back to you .  said ,  my punishment - i afflict with it whom i will , but my mercy encompasses all things .  so i will decree itfor those who fear me and give zakah and those who believe in our verses -
and those who turn away from al-laghw .
pharaoh said : “ haman , build for me a lofty tower that i may scale the highways --
you will soon learn who will face a humiliating punishment and will be encompassed by an everlasting torment . 
he said , 'that wherein my lord has established me is better ; so aid me forcefully , and i will set up a rampart between you and between them .
save those to whom god shows mercy . surely , he is the mighty , the merciful one .
bid your people say their prayers , and be constant in their observance . we demand nothing from you . it is we who provide for you , and the best end is that of righteousness .
so whosoever will may heed .
but if you held command , you were sure to make mischief in the land and cut off the ties of kinship !
then howwas my torment and my warnings ?
and as the caravan set out , their father said :  indeed i smell the fragrance of joseph . i say so although you may think that i am doting . 
have they not looked at the heaven above them , how we have made it and adorned it , and there are no rifts in it ?
the sky nor the earth cried for them , nor were they given respite .
whom allah has cursed , and who said , ‘ i will surely take of your servants a settled share ,
violent that he compelled against them seven nights and eight days , uninterruptedly , and thou mightest see the people laid prostrate in it as if they were the stumps of fallen down palm-trees .
o prophet ! say to those who are captives in your hands :  if allah findeth any good in your hearts , he will give you something better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful . 
by the heaven which giveth the returning rain ,
then god made them taste of disgrace in this life ; and the torment of the life to come is greater , if they understand .
verily those who blaspheme unsuspecting chaste believing women will be cursed in this world and the next ; and for them there will be severe punishment .
it is god who has settled you on the earth and before him you will all be assembled .
but when our signs came to them in all their clarity they said ,  this is clearly sorcery ! 
and we have indeed made the quran easy to understand and remember , then is there any that will remember ?
that is their requital—hell—on account of their disbelief , and their taking my revelations and my messengers in mockery .
ah , what will convey unto thee what she is ! -
and when it is said to them , 'fear what is before you and what is behind you ; haply you will find mercy ' --
there are many angels in the heavens whose intercession will be of no benefit unless god grants such permission to whichever of them he wants .
'both of you , together , go down out of iteach of you an enemy to the other ' he said : 'but , if my guidance comes to you , whosoever followsmy guidance shall neither go astray nor be unprosperous ;
'when will the day of judgement be ' they ask .
this is the true story . there is no lord but god . it is god who is majestic and all-wise .
so when the deafening shout arrives ,
indeed , allah commands you to render trusts to whom they are due and when you judge between people to judge with justice . excellent is that which allah instructs you . indeed , allah is ever hearing and seeing .
therefore hold fast to what we have divinely revealed to you ; indeed you are upon the straight path . .
those who believe , their hearts being at rest in god 's remembrance -- in god 's remembrance are at rest the hearts
they will live in gardens with honour .
call not to-day for a single death but call for death manifold .
these are the people of the right hand .
“ and i do not portray my soul as innocent ; undoubtedly the soul excessively commands towards evil , except upon whom my lord has mercy ; indeed my lord is oft forgiving , most merciful . ”
and we shall set hell on that day unto the infidels with a setting .
with two fountains gushing constantly , --
this is a book we have sent down unto thee , blest , that they may ponder the revelations thereof , and that there may be admonished men of understanding .
so when they took him away – and all of them agreed that they should drop him in the dark well ; and we sent the divine revelation to him , “ you will surely tell them of their deed at a time when they will not know . ”
for what my lord forgave me and made me one of the honoured ones ! ’
and they will never bring you an example , but we shall bring you a true narration and better than it .
neither those who disbelieve among the people of the scripture nor the idolaters love that there should be sent down unto you any good thing from your lord . but allah chooseth for his mercy whom he will , and allah is of infinite bounty .
he has sovereignty over the heavens and the earth . all affairs will return to god .
when the earth is shaken to herconvulsion ,
those messengers ! we preferred some to others ; to some of them allah spoke ; others he raised to degrees ; and to 'iesa , the son of maryam , we gave clear proofs and evidences , and supported him with ruh-ul-qudus ] . if allah had willed , succeeding generations would not have fought against each other , after clear verses of allah had come to them , but they differed - some of them believed and others disbelieved . if allah had willed , they would not have fought against one another , but allah does what he likes .
dark green .
o ye who believe ! observe your duty to allah with right observance , and die not save as those who have surrendered
and verily they had already sworn unto allah that they would not turn their backs . an oath to allah must be answered for .
allah said : verily then thou art of the respited :
allah calls to the home of peaceand guides whom he wills to a straight path .
that is because they are averse to that which allah hath revealed , therefor maketh he their actions fruitless .
'we have not failed in our tryst with thee , ' they said , 'of our volition ; but we were loaded with fardels , even the ornaments of the people , and we cast them , as the samaritan also threw them , into the fire . '
be steadfast ; for surely , god does not let the wages of the righteous be wasted .
and allah is watching those who have chosen supporters besides him ; and you are not responsible for them .
and sees your movements among those who prostrate themselves :
do not yield to one persistent in swearing ,
it is no fault in you , that you should seek bounty from your lord ; but when you press on from arafat , then remember god at the holy waymark , and remember him as he has guided you , though formerly you were gone astray .
when they said : certainly yusuf and his brother are dearer to our father than we , though we are acompany ; most surely our father is in manifest error :
he has subjected to you all that is in the heavens and the earth , all being from him . verily there are signs in this for those who reflect .
in response noah was told : 'most certainly he is not of your family ; verily he is of unrighteous conduct . so do not ask of me for that concerning which you have no knowledge . i admonish you never to act like the ignorant ones .
among the people of moses is a section that shows the way to the truth , and deals justly in accordance with it .
when we substitute a verse in place of another verse—and god knows best what he reveals—they say , “ you are an impostor. ” but most of them do not know .
and those who were given the knowledge said : woe to you ! allah 's reward is better for him who believes and does good , and none is made to receive this except the patient .
so when she arrived , she was asked ,  is this thy throne ?  she said ,  it was just like this ; and knowledge was bestowed on us in advance of this , and we have submitted to allah . 
in al-lauh al-mahfuz !
youare truly among the messengers sent
the day whereon man shall rember whatsoever he had striven for .
nor food other than suppuration
and she in whose house he was , solicited him against himself ; and she fastened the doors , and said : come on , o thou ! he said : allah be my refuge : verily he is my lord ; he hath made me a goodly dwelling ; verily the wrong-doers fare not well .
and most surely we will make what is on it bare ground without herbage .
so they cast down their ropes and staffs , and said ,  by pharaoh 's honour , we shall surely win . 
those who have said , 'our lord is god . ' then have gone straight , upon them the angels descend , saying , 'fear not , neither sorrow ; rejoice in paradise that you were promised .
by the angels who gently release the souls of the believers ,
no ; but god is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and verily judgment and justice must indeed come to pass .
and ordain for us good in the world and in the hereafter ; verily we have been guided unto thee . allah said : as to my chastisement , therewith afflict whomsoever i will and as to my mercy , it comprehendeth everything . wherefore i shall ordain it for those who fear an give poor- rate and those who believe in our signs .
him allah shall torment with the greatest torment .
the arrogant leaders of his people said ,  shu'ayb , we will expel you and your fellow believers from our town unless you return to our faith .  he said ,  even though we detest it ?
by theranged in ranks ,
“ indeed their account is only upon my lord , if you perceive . ”
then afterwards we drowned the rest .
by the morning light .
and his escort will say , “ this is what i have ready with me . ”
and make us submit , o lord , to your will , and our progeny a people submissive to you . teach us the way of worship and forgive our trespasses , for you are compassionate and merciful ;
if allah should hasten evil to people as they would hasten good , their term would already have been decided . but we leave those who do not expect to meet us to wander blindly in their insolence .
ah ! what will convey unto thee what sijjin is ! -
and that it is he who has given wealth and contentment ?
and unto himbelongeth majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the mighty , the wise .
said : you believe in him before i give you leave ; most surely he is the chief of you who taught you enchantment , therefore i will certainly cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , and i will certainly crucify you on the trunks of the palm trees , and certainly you will come to know which of us is the more severe and the more abiding in chastising .
they also say ,  do not believe anyone except those who follow your religion , so that no one may have what you have received or may argue with you before your lord .  , tell them ,  the only guidance is the guidance of god . all favors are in the hands of god . he grants his favors to whomever he wants . he is munificent and all-knowing  .
and a few from the latter .
whosoever does an evil deed will be requited only with the like of it ; and whosoever acts righteously and has attained to faith -- be he a male or a female -- they shall enter paradise and be provided sustenance beyond all reckoning .
ha ; meem .
and indeed , lot was among the messengers .
was the message given to him , out of all of us ? in fact , he is a wicked liar . ”
whither then go ye ?
and satan will say when the matter has been decided , “ indeed allah had given you a true promise – and the promise i gave you , i made it untrue to you ; and i had no control over you except that i called you and you obeyed me ; so do not accuse me , blame only yourselves ; neither can i help you , nor can you help me ; i have no concern with your ascribing me as a partner ; indeed for the unjust is a painful punishment . ”
the servants of the all-merciful are those who walk in the earth modestly and who , when the ignorant address them , say , 'peace ' ;
when they are called to god and his prophet , that he may judge between them , a section of them turns away .
and how many a generation before them have we destroyed ! can youfind a single one of them or hear even a whisper of them ?
thus they will give you the lie regarding what ye say , then ye can neither avertnor obtain help . and whoso among you doeth wrong , we shall make him taste great torment .
when our revelations are recited to him , he says ,  these are just ancient fables . 
let those who can not find someone to marry maintain chastity until god makes them rich through his favors . let the slaves who want to buy their freedom have an agreement with you in writing if you find them to be virtuous . give them money out of god 's property which he has given to you . do not force your girls into prostitution to make money if they want to be chaste . if they have been compelled to do so , god will be all-merciful and all-forgiving to them .
indeed your lord is the all-mighty , the all-merciful .
praise isto allah , who has sent down upon his servant the book and has not made therein any deviance .
say : who is it in whose hand is the kingdom of all things and who gives succor , but against him succor is not given , if you do but know ?
these are some stories from the past that we reveal to you . neither you , nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . the future belongs to the pious .
the excessively insulting one , spreader of spite .
except for an old woman who was among those that stayed behind .
not a town is there but vve are going to destroy it before the day of judgment or to torment it with a severe torment ; that is in the book inscribed .
the day when we shall say to hell , ‘ are you full ? ’ it will say , ‘ is there any more ? ’
allah has set a seal upon their hearts and ears ; their sight is dimmed and for them is a great punishment .
they will say : 'allah ' say : 'will you not be cautious '
when the eye is bewildered ,
and to dawudwe gave sulaiman . how excellentslave ! verily , he was ever oft-returning in repentance !
or has he only daughters and ye have sons ?
this is because they said to those who dislike what allah has sent down , “ we will obey you regarding one matter * ” ; and allah knows their secrets . .
the day when hell is brought , man will take admonition on that day , but what will that admonition avail him ?
but god does not grant a soul respite once its term has come to end . and god is aware of what you do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have prepared a painful punishment .
they rejoice because of favour from allah and kindness , and that allah wasteth not the wage of the believers .
those in whose hearts is a disease - thou seest how eagerly they run about amongst them , saying :  we do fear lest a change of fortune bring us disaster .  ah ! perhaps allah will givevictory , or a decision according to his will . then will they repent of the thoughts which they secretly harboured in their hearts .
have they not seen the birds obedient in mid-air ? none holdeth them save allah . lo ! herein , verily , are portents for a people who believe .
that allah may requite each person according to what he has earned . truly , allah is swift at reckoning .
that is why we have sent it down as an eloquent qur'an , and explained in different ways the intimidations through it that they may haply take heed , or perhaps it may lead them to contemplate .
so we exacted retribution from them . they were both on an open highway , plain to see .
only god has the knowledge of the hour . he sends rain from the heavens , and knows what is in the mothers ' wombs . no one knows what he will do on the morrow ; no one knows in what land he will die . surely god knows and is cognisant .
do not think that those who are happy with their possessions and positions and those who love to be praised for what they themselves have not done can ever be saved from torment . for them there will be a painful punishment .
say : who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? -- say : allah . say : do you take then besides him guardians who do not control any profit or harm for themselves ? say : are the blind and the seeing alike ? or can the darkness and the light be equal ? or have they set up with allah associates who have created creation like his , so that what is created became confused to them ? say : allah is the creator of all things , and he is the one , the supreme .
and remember how he gave you shelter when you were few in number and considered weak in the land , ever fearing that the people would snatch you away ; but he gave you refuge and supported you with his victory and provided you with goodness , so that you might give thanks .
and when they hear what has been sent down to the messenger , thou seest their eyes overflow with tears because of the truth they recognize . they say , 'our lord , we believe ; so do thou write us down among the witnesses .
over it are appointed nineteen .
in order that thou mayest admonish a people , whose fathers had received no admonition , and who therefore remain heedless .
and when he came to it , he was called ,  o moses ,
flog the adulteress and the adulterer , each one of them , with a hundred lashes . let no pity for them cause you to disobey god , if you truly believe in god and the last day ; and let their punishment be witnessed by a number of believers .
close friends will turn into enemies of one another on that day , except the pious .
and allah does not respite a soul when its appointed term has come , and allah is aware of what you do .
a tongue , and two lips ,
as he considers himself independent !
in this there is evidencefor the believers .
and do not drive away those who call upon their lord at morning and evening desiring his countenance ; nothing of their account falls upon thee , and nothing of thy account falls upon them , that thou shouldst drive them away , and so become one of the evildoers .
stand there never . a mosque that was founded upon godfearing from the first day is worthier for thee to stand in ; therein are men who love to cleanse themselves ; and god loves those who cleanse themselves .
when you go forth journeying in the land , there is no blame on you if you shorten the prayer , if you fear that the unbelievers might cause you harm . surely the unbelievers are your open enemies .
one day shall we gather them all together : we shall say to those who ascribed partners :  where are the partners whom yetalked about ? 
they had indeed found their forefathers astray .
and those who give to others what has been bestowed upon them with their hearts trembling at the thought that they must return to their lord ;
whoever does good and believes -whether he is male or female - such shall enter the garden , and they shall not be wronged in the slightest .
we have created the human being out of pure mud-moulded clay
nor shall they be permitted so that they might excuse themselves .
said :  believe ye in him before i give you permission ? surely he is your leader , who has taught you sorcery ! but soon shall ye know ! be sure i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , and i will cause you all to die on the cross ! 
and the fifth time , that the curse of allah be upon him if he is a liar .
soon will we apply ourselves to you , o you two armies .
o prophet , why should you forbidwhat god has made lawful for you , in order to please your wives ? yet god is forgiving and kind .
the sun and the moon to a reckoning .
'this ' , said heto his council , 'is a cunning sorcerer
and whoever brings evil , these shall be thrown down on their faces into the fire ; shall you be rewardedaught except what you did ?
your friend has not gone astray , nor has he erred .
and those who disbelieve say : we believe not in this qur'an nor in that which was before it ; but oh , if thou couldst see , when the wrong-doers are brought up before their lord , how they cast the blame one to another ; how those who were despisedsay unto those who were proud : but for you , we should have been believers .
are they better , or the people of tubba ? and those who were before them ? we destroyed them ; they were indeed criminals .
the mother of moses was perturbed in the morning . had we not strengthened her heart to remain a believer she had almost given him away .
and fruits and grass ,
fightin god 's cause and remember that he is all hearing and all knowing .
those are the verses of the wise book ,
there is not one among the people of the book who will not believe in it before his death ; and he will be a witness over them on the day of resurrection .
and we brought down from the sky blessed water , and produced with it gardens and grain to harvest .
that is because they say unto those who hate what allah hath revealed : we will obey you in some matters ; and allah knoweth their secret talk .
there is security of life for you in the law of retribution . it is expected that you will refrain from breaking this law .
those who join that which allah has commanded to be joined , fear their lord , and dread the terrible reckoning .
 that we may glorify you much ,
they said : o our father ! surely we went off racing and left yusuf by our goods , so the wolf devoured him , and you will not believe us though we are truthful .
until , when they see what they were promised , they will know who is weaker in helpers , and fewer in numbers .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say to the muslims , “ which group has a better home , and a better alliance ? ”
and it was close that they were about to mislead you somewhat from the divine revelation we sent to you , for you to attribute something else * to us ; and if it were * * , they would have accepted you as a friend .
say :  if any men go astray , most gracious extendsto them , until , when they see the warning of allah- either in punishment or inthe hour , - they will at length realise who is worst in position , andweakest in forces !
leave me to deal with the deniers , lords of ease and comfort ; and do thou respite them awhile .
and when there comes to them a book from allah , confirming what is with them , - although from of old they had prayed for victory against those without faith , - when there comes to them that which theyhave recognised , they refuse to believe in it but the curse of allah is on those without faith .
your lord is the rich beyond need , the possessor of mercy . if he wills , he can do away with you , and substitute whomever he wills in your place , just as he produced you from the descendants of another people .
thisis a plain statement for mankind , a guidance and instruction to those who are al-muttaqun .
tell whoever disputes with you on this matter after true knowledge has come to you : 'come ! let us summon our sons and your sons , and our women and your women , and ourselves and yourselves , and then let us pray together and invoke the curse of allah on those who lie . '
we send rain-impregnated winds , and water from the sky which you drink , but you are not the keepers of its store .
allah propoundeth for those who disbelieve the similitude of the wife of nuh and the wife of lut . they were under two of our righteous bondmen ; then they defrauded them . wherefore the twain availed them naught against allah , and it was said : enter ye twain the fire with those who enter .
it is he who sent his messenger with guidance and the true faith in order to make it superior to other systems of belief , even though the idolaters may not like it .
a messenger reciting to you the verses , clear verses of allah , so that he may bring forth those who believe and do good deeds from the darkness into thelight . whosoever believes in allah and does good deeds he will admit to gardens underneath which rivers flow where they shall live for ever and ever . for those , allah has made a goodly provision .
or have ye a clear warrant ?
and when it is said to them : believe as the people believe , they say : shall we believe as the fools believe ? now surely they themselves are the fools , but they do not know .
indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the continuous alternation of night and day , and the ships which sail the seas carrying what is of use to men , and the water which allah sends down from the sky thereby reviving the dead earth and dispersing all kinds of beasts in it , and the movement of the winds , and the obedient clouds between heaven and earth – certainly in all these are signs for the intelligent .
and pietyas from us , and purity : he was devout ,
that he may forgive you somewhat of your sins and respite you to an appointed term . lo ! the term of allah , when it cometh , can not be delayed , if ye but knew .
and whatsoever of affliction befalleth you is owing to that which your hands have earned ; and he pardoneth much .
he it is who hath sent his messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth , that he may cause it to prevail over all religion . and allah sufficeth as a witness .
he sends down water from the sky that fills riverbeds to overflowing , each according to its measure . the torrent carries along swelling foam , akin to what rises from smelted ore from which man makes ornaments and tools . god thus depicts truth and falsehood . the scum is cast away , but whatever is of use to man remains behind . god thus speaks in parables .
an inquirer asked for the affliction that is to come
 further i have spoken to them in public and secretly in private ,
a party of the people of the scripturewish to lead you astray . but they shall not lead astray anyone except themselves , and they perceive not .
there will only be groaning for them , and they will not hear any thing .
do they not see that god , who has created heavens and earth , is able to create the like of them ? he has appointed a definite term for them ; there is no doubt about it , but the wrongdoers persist in denying the truth .
and 'ad and thamud ! and indeedis clearly apparent to you from theirdwellings . shaitanmade their deeds fair-seeming to them , and turned them away from thepath , though they were intelligent .
that is because those who disbelieve follow the falsehood , and those who believe follow the truth from their lord . and thus allah propoundeth unto mankind their similitude .
who has created death and life , that he may test you which of you is best in deed . and he is the all-mighty , the oft-forgiving ;
whosoever leaves his country in duty to god will find many places of refuge , and abundance on the earth . and he who leaves his home and becomes an emigre in the way of god and his messenger , and death overtake him , is sure to receive his reward from god ; for god is forgiving and kind .
if we will , we can send down on them a sign from heaven before which their necks will remain humbled .
doth he promise you that you , when ye are dead and have become dust and bones , willbe brought forth ?
whose sides forsake their couches as they supplicate to their lord in fear and hope ; who give in charity of that which we have given them .
nor were they concerned with feeding the destitute .
assuredly he beheld him in the horizon manifest .
who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning allah , or denieth the truth when it cometh unto him ? is not there a home in hell for disbelievers ?
or do they say , “ he is possessed ? ” in fact , he brought them the truth , but most of them hate the truth .
then move with the crowd impetuously , and pray god to forgive you your sins . god is surely forgiving and kind .
“ the lord of moosa and haroon . ”
and he fears not its consequence .
they did not believe in the great god ,
the angels replied ,  you are glorious indeed ! we do not know more than what you have taught us . you alone are all-knowing and all-wise  .
andibrahim who fulfilled :
moses ' mother 's heart was full of anxiety -- she would have disclosed his identity had we not strengthened her heart so that she might be a firm believer .
then on the day of resurrection he will disgrace them and proclaim , “ where are my partners , concerning whom you disputed ” ; the people of knowledge will say , “ all disgrace and evil is upon the disbelievers this day . ”
they would make for him anything that he wanted like fortresses , statues , large basins like reservoirs , and huge immovable cooking pots . it was said ,  family of david , worship and act gratefully . only few of my servants are grateful . 
and his people came hastening to him , and beforethey had been doing evil deeds . he said ,  o my people , these are my daughters ; they are purer for you . so fear allah and do not disgrace me concerning my guests . is there not among you a man of reason ? 
so the disbelievers came running towards him .
indeed , did you know with certain knowledge
why bringest thou not angels unto us if thou art of the truthtellers !
lord of the heavens and earth , and of what between them is , the all-mighty , the all-forgiving . '
from following me ? then have you disobeyed my order ? 
they assign to allah a portion out of the produce and cattle that he has created , saying out of their fancy : 'this is for allah ' - so they deem -'and this is for the associateswhom we have contrived . ' then , the portion assigned to the beings whom they have set up as associatesdoes not reach allah , but the portion assigned to allah reaches the beings they set up as associates ! indeed evil is what they decide !
but the wretched one will avoid it -
these will dwell in gardens , honoured .
but when he tries him , by straitening his means of life , he says :  my lord has humiliated me ! 
destroying everything by the command of its lord ! so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings ! thus do we recompense the people who are mujrimun !
the leading men of his people replied : 'we see that you are in palpable error . '
do not betray me
it is he who pushes the orphan away ,
but they disregarded , so we unleashed upon them a violent flood and replaced their two gardens with two gardens bearing bitter fruit , tamarisk , and sparse lote trees .
they have rejected it and have followed their own desires , but all matters will be settled .
and he is god , my lord , and i do not associate any one with my lord .
exalt the name of your lord , the great .
and the recompense of evil is punishment like it , but whoever forgives and amends , he shall have his reward from allah ; surely he does not love the unjust .
such are the gardens which we will give to our god-fearing servants as their inherited property .
allah has given witness that there is none worthy of worshipexcept him – and the angels and the scholars also give witness , established with justice– there is no god except him , the almighty , the wise .
we knowingly exalted themabove other peoples of the world
but those who reject our signs , - them shall punishment touch , for that they ceased not from transgressing .
we have sent down clear revelations to you and the example of those who passed away before you and an admonition for the god-fearing .
surely the godfearing shall be in a station secure
it is god who enables you to travel on land and sea . and when you are sailing on ships and rejoicing in the favourable wind , a storm arrives , and the waves surge upon those on board from every side and they think they are encompassed , then they make a fervent appeal to god , saying in all sincerity ,  if you deliver us from this , we will surely be of the thankful . 
believers , do not take your fathers or your brothers for a guide if they love disbelief rather than belief . whosoever of you takes them for guides are the harmdoers .
said the brothers :  if he has stolen , his brother had stolen before .  but joseph kept this secret and did not disclose it to them , and said :  you are worse in the degree of evil , for god knows better of what you allege . 
the people of lot denied the messengers
but they charged him with falsehood . thereupon we delivered noah and those who were with him in the ark , and caused those who rejected our signs as false to be drowned . surely they were a blind folk .
o prophet , struggle with the unbelievers and hypocrites , and be thou harsh with them ; their refuge is gehenna -- an evil homecoming !
and the mountains will be like carded wool .
and also others bound in fetters .
 nay , but we are deprived ! 
at it the skies are ready to burst , the earth to split asunder , and the mountains to fall down in utter ruin ,
if only they humbled themselves when our scourge overtook them ! but their hearts were hardened , and satan decorated to them what they were doing .
do you fear that you will notgive in charity before your consultation ? then if you are unable to do so , god has turned to you in his mercy ; then observe your prayers and pay the prescribed alms and obey god and his messenger . god is aware of all that you do .
indeed we will withdraw the punishment a little ; but you will revert .
again your ruin has come close , still closer .
then you erring ones , you that cried lies ,
they said ,  dhu ' l-qarnayn , gog and magog are ravaging this land . would you establish a barrier between us and them if we pay you a certain tax ? 
pharaoh said :  and what is the 'lord and cherisher of the worlds ' ? 
because they followed the way that made god wrathful , and hated to adopt the way of his pleasure ? so he made their actions come to nothing .
to the believers they declare belief and , in secret to their own devils , they say ,  we were only mocking  .
do not be like those who said that they have heardbut do not pay any attention to them .
from thedid we create you , and into it shall we return you , and from it shall we bring you out once again .
have we sent down to them any authority , which speaks in support of their idols ?
the avarice of plenitude keeps you occupied
it is the day when they will be tormented in the fire ,
whoever brings a good deed , he shall have ten like it , and whoever brings an evil deed , he shall be recompensed only with the like of it , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
, tell the believers to indulge those who have no fear of any evil days coming upon them from allah so that allah may himself requite them for their deeds .
behold , this is your recompense and your endeavour has been appreciated .
no just estimate have they made of allah : for allah is he who is strong and able to carry out his will .
hurling against them stones of baked clay
and now have we set theeon a clear road ofcommandment ; so follow it , and follow not the whims of those who know not .
your lord said : “ pray to me , and i will accept your prayers . surely those who wax too proud to worship me shall enter hell , utterly abased . ”
whatever favor you have is from allah . whenever you are afflicted you groan to him .
theirs shall be everlasting gardens which the most compassionate lord has promised his servants in a realm which is beyond the ken of perception . surely his promise shall he fulfilled .
along with his wife , that carrier of slanderous tales ;
do they imagine we do not hear their secret talk and their private counsels ? on the contrary , our messengersare at their sides , recording everything .
an messenger , who rehearses to you the signs of allah containing clear explanations , that he may lead forth those who believe and do righteous deeds from the depths of darkness into light . and those who believe in allah and work righteousness , he will admit to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to dwell therein for ever : allah has indeed granted for them a most excellent provision .
that is because god is the truth , and what they call upon besides him is falsehood . god is the most high , the supreme one .
call to mind that when we invited moses for a fixed term of forty nights and days , you took to calf worship in his absence . though you had committed a wicked transgression ,
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things ; there is no god except him ; so where are you reverting ?
by oath of the late morning ,
and he swore to them both : most surely i am a sincere adviser to you .
and keep recounting the favours of your lord .
those who criticize the contributors among the believers concerningcharities andthe ones who find nothingexcept their effort , so they ridicule them - allah will ridicule them , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will be told ,  do not pray to die only once but pray to die many times . 
the hour is their appointed time—the hour is more disastrous , and most bitter .
to keep their established covenants with god , not to disregard their firm oaths ; they have already appointed god as their guarantor . god certainly knows what you do .
in all truth and justice , your lord 's word has been completed . no one can change his words . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
he said , “ get out of it , despised and vanquished . whoever among them follows you—i will fill up hell with you all .
moreover my brother aaron is more eloquent than i. send him with me as a helper and to confirm i speak truly , for ' i fear they will cry me lies . '
did we not destroy many a nation of the earlier times ?
ha mim .
o you who believe ! when youconsult the messengerin private , spend something in charity before your private consultation . that will be better and purer for you . but if you find not , then verily , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
verily , those who disbelieve in allah and his messengers and wish to make distinction between allah and his messengerssaying ,  we believe in some but reject others ,  and wish to adopt a way in between .
before them , not one of the communities which we destroyed believed either . will these believe ?
we do not send down the angels except with truth ; and the disbelievers would not then be reprieved .
say , “ i am commanded that i must worship allah as his sincere bondman . ”
he it is who sends his blessings on you , andhis angels , that he may bring you forth out of utter darkness into the light ; and he is merciful to the believers .
when the waves overshadow them like a canopy , they pray to god with all-exclusive faith in him . but after he has safely brought them to the shore , there are some who vacillate between doubt and belief , but no one rejects our signs except those who are perverse and disbelieve .
we had placed between them and the towns which we had blessed hamlets prominent , and we had ordained the course through them : ‘ travel through them in safety , night and day . ’
the hypocrites will call out to the muslims , “ were we not with you ? ” ; they will answer , “ yes you were , why not ? but you had put your souls into trial , and you used to await misfortune for the muslims , and you doubted , and false hopes deceived you until allah ’ s command came – and the big cheat had made you conceited towards the command of allah . ”
on the day when they behold it , it will be as if they had lingered but an evening , or , a morning .
he said : hearken they unto you when ye cry ?
did we not create you of a mean fluid ,
nay , by the moon
the affair of allah cometh , so seek not to hasten it . hallowed be he and exalted above that which they associate .
if they should dispute with you , then say ,  god is well aware of what you do . 
and prepare against them what force you can and horses tied at the frontier , to frighten thereby the enemy of allah and your enemy and others besides them , whom you do not knowallah knows them ; and whatever thing you will spend in allah 's way , it will be paid back to you fully and you shall not be dealt with unjustly .
allah admonisheth you that ye repeat not the like thereof ever , if ye arebelievers .
and proclaim to the people the hajj ; they will come to you on foot and on every lean camel ; they will come from every distant pass -
why was there not a single township , which believed , - so its faith should have profited it , - except the people of jonah ? when they believed , we removed from them the penalty of ignominy in the life of the present , and permitted them to enjoyfor a while .
and indeed they supposed , even as ye suppose , that allah would not raise anyone-
o thou peaceful soul !
to him belongs whatever abides in the night and the day , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
is it this statement that ye scorn ,
to him is the call of truth ; and those upon whom they call , apart from him , answer them nothing , but it is as a man who stretches out his hands to water that it may reach his mouth , and it reaches it not . the prayer of the unbelievers goes only astray .
the like of which was not created among cities ,
he said ,  i will ask forgiveness for you from my lord . indeed , it is he who is the forgiving , the merciful . 
the fire – upon which they are presented morning and evening ; and when the last day is established – “ put the people of firaun into the most severe punishment . ”
o ye who believe ! observe your duty to allah . and let every soul look to that which it sendeth on before for the morrow . and observe your duty to allah . lo ! allah is informed of what ye do .
and put your trust in god . god is enough as a trustee .
,  every single one of us has his place assigned :
and he showed him the tremendous token .
nor i imagine that the hour is going to happen ; and if am brought back to my lord , surely i will find something better than this as a retreat .
those who went before them also plotted . but god struck at the foundations of their building , and the roof fell down upon them from above . the punishment came upon them from where they did not expect .
abraham said ,  peace be with you . i shall ask my lord to forgive you ; he has been gracious to me .
alif , lam , mim , sad .
when a sign comes to them , they say , “ we will not believe unless we are given the like of what was given to god ’ s messengers. ” god knows best where to place his message . humiliation from god and severe torment will afflict the criminals for their scheming .
it is he who shows you his signs and sends down to you from the sky , provision . but none will remember except he who turns back .
there will be no blame on those who believe and do righteous deeds for whatever they might have partakenas long as they refrain from things prohibited , and persist in their belief and do righteous deeds , and continue to refrain from whatever is forbidden and submit to divine commandments , and persevere in doing good , fearing allah . allah loves those who do good .
by allah ! we were certainly in manifest error ,
but never came a messenger to them but they mocked him .
but when the truth came to them from us , they said , “ if only he was given the like of what was given to moses. ” did they not disbelieve in what was given to moses in the past ? they said , “ two works of magic backing one another. ” and they said , “ we are disbelieving in both . ”
that neither nourishes , nor satisfies hunger .
so woe to them who write the book with their hands and then say , ‘ this is from allah , ’ that they may sell it for a paltry gain . so woe to them for what their hands have written , and woe to them for what they earn !
when the waters overflowed , we carried you in the cruising ship .
and if you utter the saying aloud , then surely he knows the secret , and what is yet more hidden .
o children of israel , we delivered you from your enemy , and we made an appointment with you at the right side of the mount , and we sent down to you manna and quails ,
at the farthest lote-tree ;
and the consequence for both will be that they are in the fire , therein abiding . such is the reward of evil-doers .
and allah has created from water every living creature : so of them is that which walks upon its belly , and of them is that which walks upon two feet , and of them is that which walks upon four ; allah creates what he pleases ; surely allah has power over all things .
then he went quietly to theand said : “ what is the matter with you , why do you not eat ?
and those who glide swimmingly ,
verily god holds the heavens and the earth in position lest they deviate ; and if they deviated there will be none to hold them in place , apart from him he is sagacious and forgiving .
and his people came running towards him ; and they were in the habit of committing evil deeds ; he said , “ o my people ! these women of the tribe are my daughters * – they are purer for you – therefore fear allah and do not disgrace me in the midst of my guests ; is there not even a single righteous man among you ? ”
but persisted in that greater sin ,
by thy life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement ,
verily allah commandeth justice and well-doing and giving to kindred ; and he prohibiteth lewdness and wickedness and oppression ; he exhorteth you that haply ye may beadmonished .
“ then , when it falls , will you believe in it ? now ? when before you tried to hasten it ? ”
the ones who wait and watch about you : if ye do gain a victory from allah , they say :  were we not with you ?  - but if the unbelievers gain a success , they say :  did we not gain an advantage over you , and did we not guard you from the believers ?  but allah will judge betwixt you on the day of judgment . and never will allah grant to the unbelievers a wayover the believers .
to him is referred the knowledge of the hour , and there come not forth any of the fruits from their coverings , nor does a female bear , nor does she give birth , but with his knowledge ; and on the day when he shall call out to them , where aremy associates ? they shall say : we declare to thee , none of us is a witness .
and after them came the unworthy successors who squandered prayer and pursued their own desires , so they will soon encounter the forest of gai in hell .
so the rumbling overtook thementering upon the time of sunrise ;
we saved him and his people from the great distress ,
a half of it or a little less
recall what time the disciples said : o 'isa , son of maryam ! is thine lord able to send down unto us some food from the heaven ? he said : fear allah , if ye are indeed believers .
remember when abraham prayed :  o lord , make this a city of peace , and preserve me and my progeny from worshipping idols :
that will be their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said :  what , when we shall be reduced to bones and particles , shall we be raised again as a new creation ? 
and the true promiseshall draw near . then , you shall see the eyes of the disbelievers fixedly stare in horror . :  woe to us ! we were indeed heedless of this ; nay , but we were zalimun . 
truly , your lord is bountiful to mankind , but most of them are not grateful .
and assuredly there met them early in the morning a torment settled .
and most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle ; we give you to drink of what is in their bellies -- from betwixt the feces and the blood -- pure milk , easy and agreeable to swallow for those who drink .
he it is who quickeneth and giveth death . when he ordaineth a thing , he saith unto it only : be ! and it is .
o my prison mates ! as for one of you , he will serve wine to his master , and as for the other , he will be crucified and vultures will eat from his head . the matter about which you inquire has been decided . ’
do they not see that they are tried once or twice every year ? yet they neither repent , nor do they take admonition .
and we rescued him and his family from the great distress ,
then every soul shall know that which it : hath presented .
have they not travelled in the earth so that they may behold what wise hath been the end of those before them . they were more numerous than these , and mightier in strength and the traces in the land . but naught availed them of that which they had been earning .
on that day mankind will proceed in bands , that they may be shewn their works .
such of your women as commit indecency , call four of you to witness against them ; and if they witness , then detain them in their houses until death takes them or god appoints for them a way .
truly , all will return to your lord .
know that allah revives the earth after its death . we have certainly made the signs clear for you , so that you may exercise your reason .
he was just a servant whom we blessed , and we made him an example for the children of israel .
they said : surely we are sent towards a guilty people ,
the adulterer shall not marry except an adulteress or a polytheist woman , and none shall marry an adulteress except an adulterer or a polytheist ; and this is forbidden for the believers .
and recall that we gave moses the scripture and the criterion , so that you may be guided .
and as to that which allah restored unto his apostle from them , ye rushed neither horse nor camel upon it but allah giveth his apostles mastery over whomsoever he will . and allah is -over everything potent .
did you not see that allah has made all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth , subservient for you and bestowed his favours upon you in full , both visible and hidden ? and some men argue regarding allah , with neither knowledge , nor guidance , nor a clear book !
they cried : burn him and stand by your gods , if ye will be doing .
in order to benefit you and your cattle .
and when we let mankind taste of mercy after an adversity hath touched them , forthwith they have a plot with regard to his signs . say thou : allah is swifter in plotting . verily our mesengers write down that which ye plot .
then he gatheredand called out .
when our emissaries brought the good news to abraham , and said : “ we are surely going to destroy the inhabitants of this city ; its inhabitants are immersed in wrong-doing . ”
the day when none of their scheming will be of the least avail to them , and they will receive no succour .
and found you in need , so made you prosperous ?
they said :  keep him and his brother in suspense , and dispatch to the cities heralds to collect-
and certainly , youcall them to a straight path .
and do not confer favor to acquire more
hesaid : 'embark . in the name of allah will be its course and berthing . indeed , my lord is forgiving , the most merciful '
said :  what was your affair when you did seek to seduce yusuf ?  the women said :  allah forbid ! no evil know we against him !  the wife of al-'aziz said :  now the truth is manifest , it was i who sought to seduce him , and he is surely of the truthful . 
who is more unjust than he who fabricates a lie about god , or denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not an abode for unbelievers in hell ?
indeed in that is a sign , but most of them were not to be believers .
or show you what we have promised them , for indeed we hold them in our power .
 eat ye and drink ye to your heart 's content : for that ye worked .
he invokes someone whose harm is surely likelier than his benefit . an evil ally indeed , and an evil companion !
and halt them so that they may be questioned .
abasing , exalting ,
has not the story reached you , of those who rejected faith aforetime ? so they tasted the evil result of their conduct ; and they had a grievous penalty .
hast thou not seen how allah wafteth the clouds , then gathereth them , then maketh them layers , and thou seest the rain come forth from between them ; he sendeth down from the heaven mountains wherein is hail , and smiteth therewith whom he will , and averteth it from whom he will . the flashing of his lightning all but snatcheth away the sight .
say , :  had there been other gods with him , as they claim , they would surely have attempted to find a way to the lord of the throne .
and verily he saw him yet another time
or that he will not seize them during their activities ? and they will not be able to prevent it .
and they say , “ when is this promise due , if you are truthful ? ”
this was jesus , son of mary : a true account they contend about .
nay , would that you knew with certainty of knowledge .
god knows the unseen of the heavens and of the earth ; and god sees the things you do . '
noah was told ,  get down from the ark . your lord 's peace and blessings are upon you and your followers . your lord will grant favors to other nations and then afflict them with a painful torment . 
now , make no excuses . the truth is , you have fallen into unbelief after having believed . even if we were to forgive some of you , we will surely chastise others because they are guilty .
they say : why hath no portent been sent down upon him from his lord ? say : lo ! allah is able to send down a portent . but most of them know not .
this occurred because their noble messengers came to them with clear signs , thereupon they used to disbelieve , so allah seized them ; indeed allah is all powerful , severe in punishment .
verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they said , 'what , hast thou come to pervert us from our gods ? then bring us that thou promisest us , if indeed thou speakest truly . '
if you disbelieve , know well that allah has no need of you . yet he does not like unbelief in his servants . but if you are thankful , your thankfulness will please him . no one shall bear another 's burden . you are destined to return to your lord and he will tell you what you used to do . he is well aware even of what lies hidden in your breasts .
that is part of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . so do not set up any deity beside allah lest you are cast into hell , rebuked and deprived of every good .
perhapswill those who disbelieve wish that they were muslims .
when they will be cast thereinto , they will hear thereof a braying even as it balleth up ,
“ measure in full , and do not be of those who reduce . ”
the pious will surely be in heaven ,
the dwellers of hell fire will ask its keepers ,  pray to your lord to relieve us from the torment at least for one day  .
hastening , with eyes transfixed , towards the caller ! -  hard is this day !  , the unbelievers will say .
and among his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the differences in your languages and colours ; indeed in this are signs for people who know .
this is our gift , so bestow thou or withhold , without rendering an account .
he said , ‘ the knowledgeis with allah alone . i communicate to you what i have been sent with . but i see that you are a senseless lot . ’
we had seized them with the punishment , but they did not bow before their lord nor turned to him in humility ,
as a provision for men , and enlivened a region that was dead . even thus will be the life after death .
and we informed him of our decree : the last remnant of these will be uprooted by early morning .
and still the indignation of their hearts . for allah will turnto whom he will ; and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and those who are attentive at their worship .
“ and with your mercy , rescue us from the disbelievers . ”
and say : 'praise belongs to allah ! he will show you his signs and you will recognize them . your lord is not inattentive of what you do '
deem not that allah is unaware of what the wicked do . he but giveth them a respite till a day when eyes will stare ,
you will recognise in their faces the brightness of delight .
and we did not send before you , , any of the messengers except that they ate food and walked in the markets . and we have made some of youas trial for others - will you have patience ? and ever is your lord , seeing .
or are thy lord 's treasuries in their keeping ? or are they the registrars ?
and ‘ get apart today , you guilty ones ! ’
then they will say , “ are we given any respite ? ”
then he walked away disdainfully ,
they have enraged us ,
and say , “ all praise is to allah , who has not chosen a son for himself , and none is his partner in kingship , and none is his supporter due to weakness , and say ‘ allah is great ’ to proclaim his greatness . ”
to him be glory throughout the heavens and the earth : and he is exalted in power , full of wisdom !
indeed with hardship is ease .
then musa cast down his staff , and lo ! it swallowed up that which they had devised .
they keep away from the faith and forbid others to accept it . they destroy no one except themselves , yet they do not realize it .
and those who say , ‘ our lord ! give us joy and comfort in our spouses and offspring , and make us imams of the godwary . ’
and they but cried , when our might came upon there , 'we were evildoers . ' ;
on couches , facing one another ,
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the book overflowing with wisdom .
, call to mind when you said to him whom allah had favoured and you had favoured : “ cleave to your wife and fear allah , ” and you concealed within yourself for fear of people what allah was to reveal , although allah has greater right that you fear him . so when zayd had accomplished what he would of her , we gave her in marriage to you so that there should not be any constraint for the believers regarding the wives of their adopted sons after they had accomplished whatever they would of them . and allah 's command was bound to be accomplished .
they said : if he stealeth , a brother of his stole before . but joseph kept it secret in his soul and revealed it not unto them . he said : ye are in worse case , and allah knoweth bestthat which ye allege .
alif , lam , ra . these are the signs of the wise book .
evidencefor them is how we revived the dead earth
so whencame to sulaiman , he said :  will you help me in wealth ? what allah has given me is better than that which he has given you ! nay , you rejoice in your gift ! 
to those who believe in god and his messengers , and make no distinction between any of them , to those -- we shall surely give them their rewards . god is most forgiving and merciful .
musasaid :  lord of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , if you seek to be convinced with certainty . 
solomon inherited from david , and he said , ‘ o people ! we have been taught the speech of the birds , and we have been given out of everything . indeed this is a manifest advantage . ’
but they will never long for it because of all that their own hands have sent before , and allah is aware of evil-doers .
and those who deny our revelations - step by step we lead them on from whence they know not .
taste ! you who were powerful and noble .
and what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
that you may warn a people whose ancestors had never been warned , who are therefore heedless .
so allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the former life .
lord , it is certain that one day you will gather all the people together . god does not break his promise . 
verily the knowledge of the hour is with allah . it is he who sends down rain , and he who knows what is in the wombs . nor does any one know what it is that he will earn on the morrow : nor does any one know in what land he is to die . verily with allah is full knowledge and he is acquainted .
you will perhaps kill yourself with anguish because they are not accepting the faith .
and whom we made an example for the peopleand those after them , and warning for those who fear god .
 no sense of fatigue shall touch them , nor shall theybe asked to leave it . 
when moses ' anger calmed down , he collected the tablets . on one of them was written ,  god 's mercy and guidance are for those who have fear of him . 
we shall brand him over the nose !
moses said :  rebuke me not for forgetting , nor grieve me by raising difficulties in my case . 
nothing is said to you which had not been said to other apostles before you . surely your lord is the lord of forgiveness , but also the lord of severe retribution .
and it is binding on a town which we destroy that they shall not return .
revile not those unto whom they pray beside allah lest they wrongfully revile allah through ignorance . thus unto every nation have we made their deed seem fair . then unto their lord is their return , and he will tell them what they used to do .
we sent against them a single cry , and they became like the dry sticks of a corral builder .
and he hath subjected for you the sun and the moon , two constant toils ; and he hath subjected for you the night and the day .
and if they incline to peace , then incline to it and trust in allah ; surely he is the hearing , the knowing .
o my father ! serve not the devil . lo ! the devil is a rebel unto the beneficent .
when he is told ,  have fear of god ,  he is seized by pride which drives him to wrongdoing . hell shall be enough for him . a dreadful resting place .
and rehearse thou that which hath been revealed unto thee of the book of thy lord ; and none may alter his words , and never wilt thou find beside him a covert .
and if we had willed , we would have raised up in each town a warner .
] said :  nay , verily ! with me is my lord , he will guide me . 
in gulps will he sip it , but never will he be near swallowing it down his throat : death will come to him from every quarter , yet will he not die : and in front of him will be a chastisement unrelenting .
and we made the people who were oppressed , the inheritors of the eastern and western parts of the land in which we placed blessings ; and the good promise of your lord was fulfilled for the descendants of israel – the reward of their patience ; and we destroyed whatever firaun and his people built and whatever they had contrived .
and god replied ,  you are granted respite . 
and by oath of ten nights .
is it not a sign to them that the learned of the children of israel knew it ?
he said : verily ye and your fathers were in plain error .
but , whenreaches the collar bone
these are verses of the book that makesclear .
 have you come ,  said they ,  to turn us back from what we found our ancestors doing , so that the two of you may attain supremacy in the land ? we shall not believe in what you say .
he brings the living out of the dead and brings the dead out of the living and brings to life the earth after its lifelessness . and thus will you be brought out .
from the mischief of those who practise secret arts ;
the revelation of the almighty , the merciful .
your god is the one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts refuse to admit the truth and they are arrogant .
and may distinguish the hypocrites who were told :  fight in the way of god , or defend yourselves ,  and who had replied :  if we knew of the fight we would have followed you .  they were nearer unbelief than faith on that day , and they said with their tongues what was not in their hearts ; but god is aware of what they hide .
when our verses are recited to him , he says : 'they are but fairytales of the ancients '
then the rest we overwhelmed in the flood .
their reward from their lord will be the gardens of eden wherein streams flow and wherein they will live forever . god will be pleased with them and they will be pleased with him . thisis for those who fear their lord .
that was because their messengers came to them with clear signs but they rejected them . so god seized them : he is powerful , severe in punishment .
indeed , in their stories is a lesson for those of understanding . this is no forged tale , rather , it is a confirmation of the previous , a distinguishing of all things , a guidance and a mercy to a nation who believe .
 for me , i have faith in the lord of you : listen , then , to me ! 
but no , by your lord , they will not believe until they call you to arbitrate in their disputes , and then find within themselves no resentment regarding your decisions , and submit themselves completely .
eat only that over which the name of god has been pronounced , if you truly believe in his commands .
in the boiling water , then they will be burned in the fire .
we created man from a drop of mingled fluid so that we might try him ; we gave him hearing and sight ;
he it is who hath created you from clay , and hath decreed a term for you . a term is fixed with him . yet still ye doubt !
:  we made our way towards heaven , but we found it filled with stern guards and a flame .
what then is the matter with them , that they believe not ? -
we know of best what they say ; and youare not a tyrant over them . but warn by the quran , him who fears my threat .
and mention our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob—endowed with ability and vision .
that no soul shall bear another 's burden ,
they answered : our lord knoweth that we are indeed sent unto you ,
his companion will say :  o lord , i did not lead him to wickedness , but he was himself far astray . 
there is a share for men and a share for women from what is left by parents and those nearest related , whether , the property be small or large - a legal share .
and when the stars fall down .
in the hands of scribes
what , do you approach men , and cut the way , and commit in your assembly dishonour ? ' but the only answer of his people was that they said , 'then bring us the chastisement of god , if thou speakest truly . '
if only those who deny the truth knew the time when they would not be able to ward off the fire neither from their faces nor from their backs . they will not be helped !
then woe that day to the beliers ;
moses said :  your tryst is the day of the festival , and let the people be assembled when the sun is well up . 
we have certainly seen the turning of your face , , toward the heaven , and we will surely turn you to a qiblah with which you will be pleased . so turn your face toward al-masjid al-haram . and wherever youare , turn your faces toward it . indeed , those who have been given the scripture well know that it is the truth from their lord . and allah is not unaware of what they do .
he has created the heavens and the earth with truth . high be he exalted above all they associate as partners with him .
in fact , those who disbelieve are in denial .
in fact , you will have a reward that will never end .
so , therefore , remember me , and i shall remember you ; and give thanks and do not be ungrateful .
and it was said :  o earth ! swallow up your water , and o sky ! withhold .  and the water was diminishedand the decreewas fulfilled . and itrested on mount judi , and it was said :  away with the people who are zalimun ! 
they were a group that has passed away ; for them is what they earned , and for you is what you earn ; and you will not be questioned about their deeds .
bringing good news , and giving warnings . but most of them turn away , so they do not listen .
and my brother aaron , he is more eloquent than me , so send him with me , to help me , and to confirm my words , for i fear they will reject me . ”
be modest in thy walk , and lower thy voice ; the most hideous of voices is the ass 's . '
and some of them believe in it , and some believe not in it . thy lord knows very well those who do corruption .
theseonly wait for a single mighty blast , whichwill brook no delay .
—those who are patient and who put their trust in their lord .
yet i will give them respite : surely my plan is compact .
and they will not mind unless allah please . he is worthy to be feared and worthy to forgive .
on the day when god will raise them up together , he will tell them what they did . god takes account of it although they forget , for all things are evident to god .
said one of the two women , 'father , hire him ; surely the best man thou canst hire is the one strong and trusty . '
then shall we save our messengers and the believers , in like manner . it is incumbent upon us to save believers .
only those respond who hearken . and as to the dead , allah will raise them , and thereafter unto him they shall be returned .
on the day of resurrection , god will judge between you regarding your differences .
he is the ever-living ; there is no deity except him , so call upon him , sincere to him in religion.praise isto allah , lord of the worlds .
you will find others who want security from you , and security from their own people . but whenever they are tempted into civil discord , they plunge into it . so if they do not withdraw from you , nor offer you peace , nor restrain their hands , seize them and execute them wherever you find them . against these , we have given you clear authorization .
ye are requited naught save what ye did -
have they not journeyed in the land , and had minds to reason with , or ears to listen with ? it is not the eyes that go blind , but it is the hearts , within the chests , that go blind .
we have decreed death among you , and we are not to be outdone
woe to those who pray
then the family of pharaoh picked him out to be an enemy and a sorrow for them , indeed pharaoh and haman , and their army were sinners .
enter the gates of hell , to remain therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant .
rejoicing in the bounty that god has given them , and joyful in those who remain behind and have not joined them , because no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow ,
surely , all who are in the heavens and on the earth belong to him . what do those follow , who appeal to associates instead of to god ? they merely follow conjecture and they are only guessing .
god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose . in this there is evidencefor the believers .
whoever aspires for the yield of the hereafter – we increase its yield for him ; and whoever aspires for the yield of this world – we give him part of it , and he has no portion in the hereafter .
being disdainful of it , talking nonsense in your nightly sessions . ’
god has written : “ i will certainly prevail , i and my messengers. ” god is strong and mighty .
your lord is most knowing of what is within yourselves . if you should be righteous- then indeed he is ever , to the often returning , forgiving .
and blessed be he to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , and with whom is the knowledge of the hour , and to whom youwill be returned .
is he whose bosom allah hath expanded for al-islam , so that he followeth a light from his lord , ? then woe unto those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of allah . such are in plain error .
thecaravans to set forth safe in winter , and in summer ,
they said ,  you are only bewitched and insane .
i do not need to swear by what you see
in the end we deliver our messengers and those who believe : thus is it fitting on our part that we should deliver those who believe !
and we have not taught himto recite poetry , nor does it befit him ; it is nothing but an advice and the bright qur ’ an .
there is no state you are in , whether reading from the qur'an , or doing something else , but we are watching you as you are engaged in it . there is not the weight of an atom on the earth and in the heavens that is hidden from your lord , nor is there anything smaller or greater than this but is recorded in the perspicuous book .
the gardens of perpetuity , the doors are opened for them .
“ this is the recompense of what your hands have sent ahead and allah does not oppress the bondmen . ”
and no friend inquires after friend
as for the happy , they shall live in paradise for ever , so as long as the heavens and the earth endure , and as your lord wills an unbroken gift .
he orders you to commit evil and indecency and to assert about allah what you do not know .
but the messenger and those who shared his faith strove with their belongings and their lives . it is they who shall have all kinds of good . it is they who shall prosper .
and two of the camels , and two of the cattle . say , “ did he forbid the two males , or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? were you present when god enjoined this upon you ? ” who does greater wrong than he who invents lies and attributes them to god , in order to mislead people without knowledge ? god does not guide the wicked people .
god tells a parable about two men . one of them is dumb and useless and a burden on his friend . wherever he goes , he returns with nothing . can he be considered equal to the one who maintains justice and follows the right path ?
and that the foolish amongst us used to forge extravagant things against allah :
yet they choose apart from him gods who have not created any thing and have themselves been created , who possess no power over their loss or gain , or their death or life or being raised to life again .
and they will say , ‘ had we listened or applied reason , we would not have been among inmates of the blaze . ’
these are on a guidance from their lord , and these are they who are successful :
they had not been appointed watchers over them .
they said : either thou cast down , or we shall be the first to cast down .
say : 'if what you demand so hastily were in my power , the matter between me and you would have been long decided . but allah knows best how to judge the wrong-doers .
so submit patiently to the judgement of your lord , and do not be like the man of the fish who called out as he choked with grief .
so when the greatest universal disaster arrives ,
therefore , do not be weakened and call out for peace , you shall be the upper ones , and allah is with you and will not deprive you of your labors .
and as for those twain of you who commit it , hurt them both ; then , if they repent and amend , turn away from them ; verily allah is relenting , merciful .
like those who a short time before them tasted the mischief of their action ; there awaits them a painful chastisement .
do you then wonder at this recital ?
and those who disbelieve , say :  youare not a messenger .  say :  sufficient for a witness between me and you is allah and those too who have knowledge of the scripture . 
, follow not that whereof thou hast no knowledge . lo ! the hearing and the sight and the heart - of each of these it will be asked .
he who nourishes it will surely be successful ,
but we found not there any household of the muslims except oneand his two daughters ] .
say ,  have you considered : if the qur'an was from allah , and you disbelieved in it while a witness from the children of israel has testified to something similar and believed while you were arrogant ... ?  indeed , allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
like the custom of the people of noah and of 'aad and thamud and those after them . and allah wants no injustice forservants .
the people of the book ask thee to cause a book to descend to them from heaven : indeed they asked moses for an even greater , for they said :  show us allah in public ,  but they were dazed for their presumption , with thunder and lightning . yet they worshipped the calf even after clear signs had come to them ; even so we forgave them ; and gave moses manifest proofs of authority .
indeed the disbelievers spend their wealth in order to prevent people from the way of allah ; so they will spend it now , and then regret over it , then they will be defeated ; and the disbelievers will be gathered towards hell .
nearer to youand nearer ,
we have built above you seven mighty heavens ,
and give good news , to those who believe in this book and do good deeds . for them there will be gardens underneath which canals flow . their fruits will so resemble the fruits on the earth that every time they will be provided with fruits , they will say ,  such fruits were provided to us before on the earth.  and there will be pure spouses for them and therein they will live for ever .
turn to your lord and submit to him before his scourge overtakes you , for then you shall not be helped .
those who point at such of the believers as give the alms willingly and such as can find naught to give but their endeavours , and deride them - allahderideth them . theirs will be a painful doom .
and those who do not expect the meeting with us say ,  why were not angels sent down to us , ordo wesee our lord ?  they have certainly become arrogant within themselves andinsolent with great insolence .
my lord , grant me a righteous '
he unleashed it upon them for seven nights and eight days , in succession . you could see the people tossed around , as though they were stumps of hollow palm-trees .
the alms are only for the poor and the needy , and those who collect them , and those whose hearts are to be reconciled , and to free the captives and the debtors , and for the cause of allah , andthe wayfarer ; a duty imposed by allah . allah is knower , wise .
some faces that day shall be downcast with fear ,
then the fish swallowed him while he was blameworthy .
faces shall be humbled before the living one , the eternal . those who are burdened with wrong doing shall have failed ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he likes , and they fear with awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we send not the messengers except as giver of glad tidings and warners . but those who disbelieve , dispute with false argument , in order to refute the truth thereby . and they treat my ayat , and that with which they are warned , as jest and mockery !
they carry your burdens to lands so distant you could not have reached without much hardship . indeed your lord is compassionate and kind .
and we put covers over their hearts and deafness in their ears that they should not understand it . so when you invoke your lord alone in the qur'an they turn their backs and walk away .
yet no sooner than they saw some trading or amusement , they flocked to it and left you standing by yourself . tell them : “ that which is with allah is far better than amusement and trading . allah is the best provider of sustenance . ”
and on the day whereon those who disbelieve shall be placed before the fire : ye made away with your good things in your life of the world , and ye enjoyed yourselves therewith so today ye shall be requited with the torment of ignominy , for that ye have been growing stiff-necked on the earth without justification , and for that ye have been transgressing .
then woe to those who write the book with their own hands , and then say :  this is from allah ,  to traffic with it for miserable price ! - woe to them for what their hands do write , and for the gain they make thereby .
god has favoured some of you over others in the means of subsistence . but those who have been favoured with more do not give of their means to their dependents so that they may become equal with them . do they then deny god 's beneficence ?
—those who break the covenant made with allah after having pledged it solemnly , and sever what allah has commanded to be joined , and cause corruption on the earth—it is they who are the losers .
and we will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection , so no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least ; and though there be the weight of a grain of mustard seed , will we bring it , and sufficient are we to take account .
those who swear to keep away from their wiveshave four months of grace ; then if they reconcile , surely god is forgiving and kind .
 grant us well-being in this life and in the life hereafter for we have turned ourselves to you .  the lord replied ,  my torment only afflicts those whom i want to punish , but my mercy encompasses all things . i shall grant mercy to those who maintain piety , pay their religious tax , and those who have faith in our revelations . 
behold , twoappointed to learnlearn , one sitting on the right and one on the left .
though they shall be within sight of each other . the guilty one will gladly ransom himself from the torment of that day by sacrificing his own children ,
then a kind of fear in his soul musa felt .
andthose who do not miss their ritual - prayers at the prescribed times ;
believers , when you are called to prayer on the day of the congregation , hasten to the remembrance of allah and put your trading to oneside . that is the best for you , if you but knew .
perform the pilgrimage and the visitfor allah . and if ye are prevented , then send such gifts as can be obtained with ease , and shave not your heads until the gifts have reached their destination . and whoever among you is sick or hath an ailment of the head must pay a ransom of fasting or almsgiving or offering . and if ye are in safety , then whosoever contenteth himself with the visit for the pilgrimagesuch gifts as can be had with ease . and whosoever can not find , then a fast of three days while on the pilgrimage , and of seven when ye have returned ; that is , ten in all . that is for him whoso folk are not present at the inviolable place of worship . observe your duty to allah , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
say ,  have you considered : if allah should make for you the day continuous until the day of resurrection , what deity other than allah could bring you a night in which you may rest ? then will you not see ? 
assuredly thou art calling them to a straight path ;
andzechariah , when he cried out to his lord , ‘ my lord ! do not leave me without an heir , and you are the best of inheritors . ’
who , from their wealth is a known right
he had warned them of our assault but they disputed the warnings .
they said :  o moses , in that land live a people who are formidable ; we shall never go there until they leave . we shall enter when they go away . 
and i respite them , my stratagem is firm .
but such as fears the station of his lord , for them shall be two gardens --
and withhold yourself with those who call on their lord morning and evening desiring his goodwill , and let not your eyes pass from them , desiring the beauties of this world 's life ; and do not follow him whose heart we have made unmindful to our remembrance , and he follows his low desires and his case is one in which due bounds are exceeded .
and when our scourge fell upon them , their only cry was ,  we were indeed wrongdoers ! 
that was because there came to them their messengers with clear proofs , but they said :  shall mere men guide us ?  so they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was not in need . and allah is rich , worthy of all praise .
 and do ye get for yourselves fine buildings in the hope of living therein ?
pollution shun !
as for those who take masters other than him : god is in charge of them , and you are not responsible for them .
and thamud tribes ,
when angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their souls , they say :  in whatwere ye ?  they reply :  weak and oppressed were we in the earth .  they say :  was not the earth of allah spacious enough for you to move yourselves away ?  such men will find their abode in hell , - what an evil refuge ! -
not equal are the blind and those whosee : nor arethose who believe and work deeds of righteousness , and those who do evil . little do ye learn by admonition !
verily this ! this is the very truth .
so we gave him the good news of a boy , possessing forbearance .
and with gardens and springs .
and when he cometh to know aught of our revelations , he taketh it scoffingly . these ! theirs shall be a torment ignominous ;
but is theare arrogant , : for in the presence of thy lord are those who celebrate his praises by night and by day . and they never flag .
if god were to give in abundance to his creatures they would fill the earth with oppression . so he gives according to measure as he will . he knowshis creatures . he is all-aware and all-seeing .
 o my servants , you need not fear this day , nor shall you grieve  --
then the pleas shall become obscure to them on that day , so they shall not ask each other .
when he asked his father and his people :  what do you worship ? 
or do they have partners ? then let them bring their partners , if they should be truthful .
those who disbelieve , after having been believers and increase their disbelief , are lost and their repentance will not be accepted .
there is life for you in retaliation , o people of understanding , so that you may refrain .
should the reward of goodness be aught else but goodness ? --
your wealth and your children are but a trial , and allah has with him a great reward .
as for those who disbelieve , their works are like a mirage in a desert . the thirsty assumes it is to be water . until , when he has reached it , he finds it to be nothing , but there he finds god , who settles his account in full . god is swift in reckoning .
say thou : with allah resteth the argument evident . wherefore , had he so willed , he would have guided you all .
do they expect anything but the likes of the days of those who passed away before them ? say , “ then wait , i will be waiting with you . ”
and that when the servant of allah stood up supplicating him , they almost became about him a compacted mass . 
but whoever repents and mends his ways after committing evil shall be pardoned by allah . allah is forgiving , most merciful .
and when thou seest those who meddle with our revelations , withdraw from them until they meddle with another topic . and if the devil cause thee to forget , sit not , after the remembrance , with the congregation of wrong-doers .
allah commands you concerning your children ; the son ’ s share is equal to that of two daughters ; and if there are only daughters , for them is two-thirds of the inheritance , even if they are more than two ; and if there is only one daughter , for her is half ; and to each of the deceased ’ s parents a sixth of the inheritance , if he has children ; and if the deceased has no children but leaves behind parents , then one third for the mother ; and if he has several brothers and sisters , a sixth for the mother , after any will he may have made and payment of debt ; your fathers and your sons – you do not know which of them will be more useful to you ; this is the share fixed by allah ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise .
do not argue with the people of the book except in a manner which is best , except such of them as are wrongdoers , and say , ‘ we believe in what has been sent down to us and in what has been sent down to you ; our god and your god is one , and to him do we submit . ’
even so , we awakened them , so that they may ask one another . a speaker among them said , “ how long have you stayed ? ” they said , “ we have stayed a day , or part of a day. ” they said , “ your lord knows best how long you have stayed. ” “ send one of you to the city , with this money of yours , and let him see which food is most suitable , and let him bring you some provision thereof . and let him be gentle , and let no one become aware of you . ”
drinkers even as the drinking of thirsty camels .
if he divorceth her , then she is not allowed unto him thereafter until she wed a husband other than he ; then if he divorceth her , no blame is on the twain in that they return unto each other , if they imagine they will oh serve the bonds of allah . and these are the bonds of allah ; he expoundeth them unto a people who know .
and those who respond to their lord , and pray regularly , and conduct their affairs by mutual consultation , and give of what we have provided them .
on raised couches .
we sent not a messenger , but to be obeyed , in accordance with the will of allah . if they had only , when they were unjust to themselves , come unto thee and asked allah 's forgiveness , and the messenger had asked forgiveness for them , they would have found allah indeed oft-returning , most merciful .
verily there is a sign in this for the believers .
they said :  we miss the great beaker of the king ; for him who produces it , isa camel load ; i will be bound by it . 
does not everything in the heavens and the earth belong to god ? he surely knows what state you are in ; and on the day they go back to him . he will tell them what they used to do , for god has knowledge of everything .
we have certainly sent down manifest signs to you , and no one denies them except transgressors .
and sent down , from the rain clouds , pouring water
and some of them draw near unto others , mutually questioning .
then we drowned the other .
hast thou not seen how they wander in every valley
say thou : verily fear , if i disobeyed my lord , torment of a day mighty .
and they were pursued by a curse in this world andon the day of resurrection . no doubt ! verily , 'ad disbelieved in their lord . so away with 'ad , the people of hud .
and unto thine lord , attend .
o marium ! keep to obedience to your lord and humble yourself , and bow down with those who bow .
they will say ,  praise be to god who has taken away all sorrow from us . our lord is forgiving and appreciative .
and they scattered not , those that were given the book , excepting after the clear sign came to them .
said to those around him ,  do you not hear ? 
and indeed , all of them will yet be brought present before us .
spend for the cause of god out of what we have given you before death approaches you , and say ,  lord , would that you would give me respite for a short time so that i could spend for your cause and become one of those who do good  .
have they not seen that we drive the waterto barren land and bring forth thereby crops from which their livestock eat andthemselves ? then do they not see ?
our lord , do not make us a test for the unbelievers , and forgive us , our lord . surely you are most mighty , most wise . ”
“ to bring to you every expert great magician . ”
by the scatterers scattering
except the bondmen of allah sincere .
and dispute not with the people of the book unless in the best manner , save with those of them who do wrong ; and say : we believe in that which hath been sent down unto us and that which hath been sent down unto you : our god and your god is one ; and unto him we are submissive .
that are a community who have passed away , unto them shall be that which they earned and unto you that which ye earn , and ye shall be questioned not of that which they were wont to work .
without a doubt , in the world to come they will be the losers .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are a disgrace , and their destiny is hell ; a reward for what they used to earn .
when you are greeted with a greeting , then greet with one fairer , or repeat the same greeting . for god takes account of all things .
among people there are some who say : “ we believe in allah. ” but when such a person is made to endure suffering in allah 's cause , he reckons the persecution he suffers at the hands of people as though it is a chastisement from allah . but if victory comes from your lord , the same person will say “ we were with you. ” does allah not know whatever is in the hearts of the people of the world ?
so give them good tidings of a painful chastisement ,
in the meantime the people of the city came to lot rejoicing .
allah has promised to the believing men and the believing women gardens , beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and goodly dwellings in gardens of perpetual abode ; and best of all is allah 's goodly pleasure ; that is the grand achievement .
the steadfast , and the truthful , and the reverent , and who spend in allah 's cause , and who seek forgiveness in the last hours of the night .
moses said : 'my people ! if you believe in allah and are truly muslims then place your reliance on him alone . '
they may understand my speech .
thus dothsend inspiration to thee asto those before thee , - allah , exalted in power , full of wisdom .
and from the evil of the utterly dark night when it comes ,
those , allah knows what is in their hearts , so turn away from them , and exhort them , and say to them penetrating words about themselves .
they said : put him off and his brother , and send collectors into the cities :
he it is who creates for the first time and he it is who will create again ,
and gardens , and springs --
and verily in cattlewill ye find an instructive sign . from what is within their bodies between excretions and blood , we produce , for your drink , milk , pure and agreeable to those who drink it .
they say :  how is it no miracle was sent down to him from his lord ?  say :  god certainly has power to send down a miracle ; but most men can not understand . 
the scrolls of abraham and moses .
when the sun is covered ,
to him ascend the angels and the spirit in a day the measure of which is fifty thousand years .
mankind were only one nation * and then they differed , and had it not been for a promise * * from your lord , the matters in which they differed would have been decided here itself .
and if anythingof your wives has passed away from you to the unbelievers , then your turn comes , give to those whose wives have gone away the like of what they have spent , and be careful ofallah in whom you believe .
'it gives guidance to the right , and we have believed therein : we shall not joinanywith our lord .
and we carried him upon a thing of planks and nails ,
my people ! yours is the kingdom today , you have dominion in the land ; but who will help us against the scourge of god if it befalls us ?  but pharaoh said ,  i point out to you only that which i consider right ; and i guide you to the right path . 
and the many spoils that they were to take . god is all-mighty and all-wise .
they disputed with you concerning the truth after it had become clear , as if they were being driven towards death as they looked on .
and they attribute to allah that which they dislike , and their tongues assert the lie that they will have the best . assuredly , they will have the fire , and they will beneglected .
the burden that weighed down thy back ?
whatever they have done has been recorded in the books .
and we have not sent before you but men fromthe people of the towns , to whom we sent revelations . have they not then travelled in the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? and certainly the abode of the hereafter is best for those who guard ; do you not then understand ?
thus we have sent it down as an arabic quran and we have paraphrased the warnings in it variously so that they may be godwary , or it may prompt them to remembrance .
some faces , that day , will be humiliated ,
allah has full power over everything : establish the salat and pay the zakat . you will find with allah whatever good you send forward for your future ; allah is watching everything you do .
when the world is shaken up by its cataclysm ,
except those who believed and did good deeds , and profusely remembered allah , and took revenge after they had been wronged * ; and soon the unjust will come to know upon which side they will be overturned * * .
who pileth up wealth and layeth it by ,
or have they set up other gods besides allah ? say , “ bring your proof ; this is the remembrance of those with me and those before me ” ; but in fact most of them do not know the truth , so they turn away .
but as soon as they beheld the orchard , : “ we have certainly lost the way ;
that will neither make the head throb , nor intoxicate ,
and they plotted a plot , and we plotted a plot , while they perceived it not .
wives of men who die among you should waitfor four months and ten days ; and when the term is over there is no sin if they do what they like with themselves honourably , for god is aware of all that you do .
he shall torment whomsoever he will , and shall show mercy unto whomsoever he will , and unto him ye shall be returned .
remember when abraham said to azar , his father :  why do you take idols for god ? i certainly find you and your people in error . 
he it is that cleaveth the day-break : he makes the night for rest and tranquillity , and the sun and moon for the reckoning : such is the judgment and ordering of , the exalted in power , the omniscient .
say : 'come , i will recite what your lord has forbidden you : that you associate not anything with him , and to be good to your parents , and not to slay your children because of poverty ; we will provide you and them and that you approach not any indecency outward or inward , and that you slay not the soul god has forbidden , except by right . that then he has charged you with ; haply you will understand .
allah has prepared for them gardens underneath which rivers flow , in which they shall live for ever . that is the greatest winning .
all that he speaks of will belong to us , and he will come into our presence all alone .
and his people had no answer except to say , “ turn them out of your dwellings ; these are people who wish purity ! ”
say thou : o people of the book ! come to a word common between us and between you ; that we shall worship none save allah 's and that we shall not associate aught with him , and that none of you shall take others as lords beside allah . then if they turn away , say : bear witness that verily we are muslims .
god said ,  you have been granted your request , moses . 
none of their luxuries will be able to save them from the torment ?
o you who believe ! take not the jews and the christians as auliya ' , they are but auliya ' to one another . and if any amongst you takes them as auliya ' , then surely he is one of them . verily , allah guides not those people who are the zalimun .
and thus they may show utter ingratitude for our favours ; let them enjoy themselves for a time . but they will soon come to know .
a curse lies upon them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be despised .
we never sent an admonisher to a habitation but its well-to-do people said :  we do not believe in what you have brought . 
truly that is just and fitting , - the mutual recriminations of the people of the fire !
peace be unto ibrahim :
and this not at all difficult for allah .
surely it isfor you that you shall not be hungry therein nor bare of clothing ;
he said ,  nay , throw ye first !  then behold their ropes and their rods-so it seemed to him on account of their magic - began to be in lively motion !
whoever desires honor- then to allah belongs all honor . to him ascends good speech , and righteous work raises it . but they who plot evil deeds will have a severe punishment , and the plotting of those - it will perish .
allah will defend those who believe . verily , allah does not love the ungrateful cheat .
those who disbelieve say : if only a portent were sent down upon him from his lord ! say : lo ! allah sendeth whom he will astray , and guideth unto himself all who turn ,
but bestowed sustenance on them and on their forefathers until there came to them the truth and a messenger who clearly expounded things to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the seed . he brings the living from the dead , and he brings the dead from the living . such is god . so how could you deviate ?
hinderinggood , transgressing beyond bounds , deep in sin ,
so we saved him and his family , except for his wife , whom we destined to be among the laggards .
if you loan allah a goodly loan , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . and allah is most appreciative and forbearing .
these , surely that about which they are shall be brought to naught and that which they do is vain .
why should i fear what you associate with him , while you do not fear to associate with god that for which he has sent down to you no authority ? tell me , if you know the truth , which side has more right to feel secure .
“ send him with us tomorrow so that he may eat some fruits and play , and indeed we are his protectors . ”
and assembled together for sulaiman were his armies of jinns and men , and of birds – so they had to be restricted .
the one who disbelieves in allah after accepting faith – except him who is forced to and whose heart is still firmly upon faith – but whoever is wholeheartedly a disbeliever , upon them is the wrath of allah ; and for them is a great punishment .
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , we shall surely lodge them in lofty chambers of paradise , underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; and excellent is the wage of those who labour ,
we are your guides in this world and in the everlasting life . there , you shall have all that your souls desire , and all that you ask for
and when our command came , we saved shuaib and those who believed with him , by mercy from us , and the blast struck the wrongdoers , and they became motionless bodies in their homes .
those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish on that day that the earth were levelled with them . they will not be able to conceal anything from allah .
who join what god has commanded shall be joined , and fear their lord , and dread the evil reckoning ,
and those who recite the message ,
as it was your lord who rightfully brought you forth from your house , even though some of the believers disliked it ,
then on that day you will surely be asked about the verity of pleasures .
on that day we shall ask gehenna : 'are you full ' and it will answer : 'are there any more '
never so , for there will be no escape .
he would certainly have remained in its belly till the day of resurrection .
then we gave moses the scripture , making completeupon the one who did good and as a detailed explanation of all things and as guidance and mercy that perhaps inthe meeting with their lord they would believe .
always measure with justice and do not give short measure .
to thamud we sent their brother salih who told them ,  my people , worship god ; he is your only lord . it is he who has created you from the earth and has settled you therein . seek forgiveness from him and turn to him in repentance . my lord is certainly close to everyone and he hears all prayers . 
you are liable to imperil your life out of grief for their sake , if they should not believe this discourse .
we reveal the quran which is a cure and mercy for the believers but does nothing for the unjust except to lead them to perdition .
people had no answer except suggesting ,  kill him or burn him .  but god saved him from the fire . in this there is evidencefor the believing people .
their similitude is that of a man who kindled a fire ; when it lighted all around him , allah took away their light and left them in utter darkness . so they could not see .
neither their wealth nor their children will be of the least availagainst god -- they are the inheritors of hell , and there they shall remain forever .
“ and from the evil of the envier when he is envious of me . ”
they ask ,  why has an angel not been sent down to him ?  if we did send down an angel , the matter would be settled and they would not have been granted any respite .
how is it that you adopt the attitude of disbelief towards allah when the fact is that you were lifeless and he gave you life , and he will take away life from you and will again restore you to life : then you shall ultimately return to him .
o believers , if an ungodly man comes to you with a tiding , make clear , lest you afflict a people unwittingly , and then repent of what you have done .
we then turned him towards all the lowest of the low states .
and if hehad forged this discourse and thereafter ascribed it to us ,
and it is also due unto those who are settled in the dwelling and the faith before them , loving those who have migrated unto them , and finding in their breasts no desire for that which hath been given them , and preferring them above themselves even though there was want amongst them . and whosoever is preserved from covetousness of his soul , then those ! - they are the blissful .
then i seized those who disbelieved , and how was my rejection !
so exalt the name of your lord , the most great .
it is god ’ s pattern , ongoing since the past . you will never find any change in god ’ s pattern .
those of you who say to their wives , 'be as my mother 's back ' indeed , they are not their mothers . their mothers are only those who gave birth to them . indeed they speak dishonorably and falsely . but allah is the pardoning , the forgiving .
is it you that cause it to grow , or are we the causers of growth ?
, tell them ,  the beneficent god gives respite to those who have gone astray only until they face the torment with which they were threatened or to the day of judgment . then they will find out who will have the most miserable place and the weakest forces .
when the heaven will be split asunder and will become crimson like leather ?
he rose at dawn in the city , fearful and vigilant , when behold , the one who had sought his help the day before , shouted for his help . moses said to him , ‘ you are indeed clearly perverse ! ’
and it hearkeneth to its lord , and is duteous .
allah has only forbidden you to eat what dies of itself , and blood and swine flesh and what has been consecrated to any other name than of allah . but one will incur no sin if , forced by absolute necessity , he eats of any of these forbidden things , provided he has no intention of transgressing the law and does not take more than what is absolutely indispensable : for allah is very forgiving and very merciful .
read : in the name of your lord who created .
lo ! they who persecute believing men and believing women and repent not , theirs verily will be the doom of hell , and theirs the doom of burning .
they said ,  we have believed in the lord of the worlds ,
and they prayed for victory , and every stubborn tyrant came to disappointment .
believers , obey god and the messenger when he calls you to that which gives you life . know that god stands between man and his heart , and you shall all be gathered in his presence .
and the disbelievers said , “ we shall never believe in this qur ’ an nor in the books that were before it ” ; and if only you see , when the unjust will be brought before their lord ; they will hurl allegations on one another ; those who were subdued will say to those who were conceited , “ if it were not for you , we would have certainly accepted faith . ”
those against whom your lord ’ s word is justified will not believe .
so that he may make clear to them that whereon they were at variance , and that the unbelievers may know that they were truly liars .
or were they created of themselves ? or are they the creators ?
say :  not equal are al-khabithand at-taiyib , even though the abundance of al-khabithmay please you .  so fear allah muchand love allah much ] , o men of understanding in order that you may be successful .
when our signs are plainly recited to them , you will perceive utter repugnance on their faces and it all but seems as if they will soon pounce upon those who recite our signs to them . say :  shall i tell you what is worse than that ? the fire with which allah has threatened those who disbelieve . that is truly an evil end . 
and by the self accusing soul .
 'verily it has been revealed to us that the penaltythose who reject and turn away . ' 
so when i have made him complete and breathed into him of my spirit , then fall down making obeisance to him .
the case of those who took others than allah as their protectors is that of a spider who builds a house ; but the frailest of all houses is the spider 's house ; if they only knew .
said he , 'then if thou followest me , question me not on anything until i myself introduce the mention of it to thee . '
and allah has made for you the earth wide spread .
those who disbelieved and hindered others from the way of allah- we shall increase for them torment upon torment for they have been spreading corruption .
has he chosen daughters for himself from his creation , and selected only sons for you ?
their greeting on the day whereon they meet him will be : peace . and he hath gotten ready for them a generous hire .
we divided them into twelvetribes . when his people asked for water , we said to moses :  strike the rock with your staff ;  and behold , twelve springs of water gushed forth , so that each of the tribes had a place of its own to drink ; and we made the clouds spread shade over them and sent for them manna and quails :  eat of the good things we have provided for you .  butthey did not harm us , they harmed themselves .
show forgiveness , enjoin what is good , and turn away from the foolish .
and moses said , ‘ should you be faithless , —you and everyone on the earth , all together—indeed allah is all-sufficient , all-laudable . ’
he said , ‘ what about the former generations ? ’
 and wait ye ! we too shall wait . 
then when they forgot that whereof they were reminded we opened upon them the doors of everything , until when they boasted of that which they were given , we laid hold of them on a sudden , and lo ! they were dumbfounded .
your lord let loose upon them a scourge of punishment ;
ta , seen . these are the signs of the quran—a book that makes things clear .
'my nation , this is the shecamel of allah , a sign for you . leave her to graze upon the earth of allah and do not touch her with evil lest you be seized by a punishment that is near '
who created you , shaped you , and made you well-proportioned ,
 but as for him who believesand works righteousness , he shall have the best reward , , and weshall speak unto him mild words . 
my lord ! lo ! they have led many of mankind astray . but whoso followeth me , he verily is of me . and whoso disobeyeth me - still thou art forgiving , merciful .
said a man of faith from pharaoh ’ s clan , who concealed his faith , ‘ will you kill a man for saying , ‘ ‘ my lord is allah , ’ ’ while he has already brought you manifest proofs from your lord ? should he be lying , his falsehood will be to his own detriment ; but if he is truthful , there shall visit you some of what he promises you . indeed allah does not guide someone who is a transgressor and liar .
but those who disbelieve , for them is destruction , andwill make their deeds vain .
and we helped them , so that they were the victors ;
but not satan , who was too proud . he became one of those who deny the truth .
the punishment shall be averted from her by her testifying with four oathsby allah that he is indeed lying ,
blessed be the name of thy lord , majestic , splendid .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them , the mighty , the most forgiving .
what ! when we are dead and reduced to mere dust , ? such a return is far-fetched . ”
to moses we also revealed : 'set forth with my worshipers by night and strike for them a dry path in the sea . do not fear that you will be overtaken , neither be afraid '
he said , ‘ if you take up any god other than me , i will surely make you a prisoner ! ’
but this daythose who believe will laugh at the disbelievers
“ indeed this promise was given to us , and before us to our forefathers – this is nothing but stories of former people . ”
they rejected the evidence because of their arrogance and injustice , although their souls knew it to be true . think how terrible the end of the sinful ones was !
go , take this shirt of mine and cast it over my father 's face , he will recover his sight . then return to me with all your family '
o you who believe ! verily , among your wives and your children there are enemies for you , therefore beware of them ! but if you pardonand overlook , and forgive , then verily , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
believers , spend of what we have given you before that day arrives when there shall be neither trade , nor friendship , nor intercession . it is the unbelievers who are the harmdoers .
say : who is the lord of the seven heavens and the lord of the mighty dominion ?
man we fashioned from fermented clay dried tingling hard ,
and that he it is who maketh laugh , and maketh weep ,
so serve what you will apart from him . ' say : 'surely the losers are they who lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection ; is not that the manifest loss ?
blessed is he who could give you palaces and gardens wherein streams would flow , far better than what they want you to have .
that hath been the dispensation of allah with those who have passed away afore ; and thou shalt not find in the dispensation of allah any change .
shall cry for “ perdition , ”
and when they hear vain talk , they avoid it and say , ‘ our deeds belong to us , and your deeds belong to you . peace be to you . we do not court the ignorant . ’
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah , and wrongfully martyr the prophets , and slay people who enjoin justice – so give them the glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and whosoever comes with an evil deed , their faces shall be thrust into the fire : 'are you recompensed but for what you did ? '
and when she came she was asked : 'is your throne like this ' and she replied : 'it looks like it ' and we were given the knowledge before her , and weremuslims .
the fornicator will not marry anyone but a fornicatress or an idolatress , and the fornicatress will be married by none except a fornicator or an idolater , and that is forbidden to the faithful .
we sent noah to his people , and he lived with them a thousand years minus fifty . then they were caught by the deluge for they were evil .
and enter my paradise . ”
and we inspired the mother of musa , saying : suckle him , then when thou fearest for him , cast him into the river and fear not , nor grieve . verily we are going to restore him unto thee , and shall make him one of the sent ones .
and the trumpet will be blown : this is the day of the threatening .
if they deny you , say , ‘ my deeds belong to me and your deeds belong to you : you are absolved of what i do and i am absolved of what you do . ’
but for the favor of allah to youand his mercy , a party of them intended to lead you astray , but they only lead themselves astray , and they did not harm you a thing . allah has sent down to you the book and the wisdom and he has taught you what you did not know . the bounty of allah to you is ever great .
when , then , the sight shall be confounded .
the romans have been defeated .
bring me lumps of iron . then when he had evened up between the two mountain-sides , he said : blow ! then when he had made it fire , he said : bring me and i shall pour thereon molten copper .
for the companions of the right
do you too , o believers , wish to question your apostle as moses was in the past ? but he who takes unbelief in exchange for belief only strays from the right path .
therein they will eternally have whatever they want . this is a binding promise from your lord . 
beautified for people is the love of that which they desire - of women and sons , heaped-up sums of gold and silver , fine branded horses , and cattle and tilled land . that is the enjoyment of worldly life , but allah has with him the best return .
then surely they shall return to hell .
andwhen we said to the angels :  prostrate yourselves to adam .  they prostratedexcept iblis , who refused .
we sent no warner to any town , without its affluent saying , “ we reject what you are sent with . ”
wives of the prophet , if anyone among you commits indecency , her torment will be double . this is not at all difficult for god .
o ye who believe ! the idolaters only are unclean . so let them not come near the inviolable place of worship after this their year . if ye fear povertyallah shall preserve you of his bounty if he will . lo ! allah is knower , wise .
alif lam mim
say , “ obey god and obey the messenger. ” but if they turn away , then he is responsible for his obligations , and you are responsible for your obligations . and if you obey him , you will be guided . it is only incumbent on the messenger to deliver the clarifying message .
lo ! therein verily is a reminder for him who hath a heart , or giveth ear with full intelligence .
and it hearkeneth to its lord , and is duteous ,
have the people supposed that they will be left alone to say , “ we believe , ” without being put to the test ?
so that you may not be saddened upon losing something , nor rejoice upon what you are given ; and allah does not like any boastful , conceited person .
never did we send any messenger before you to whom we did not reveal :  there is no god but me . so serve me alone . 
and what reason have i that i should not serve him who brought me into existence ? and to him you shall be brought back ;
say : 'for this i ask of you no wage , and i am not of those who take things upon themselves .
and say :  this is only magic .
we said ,  your lord may yet have mercy on you , but if you do the same again , so shall we : we have made hell a prison for those who deny the truth . 
said :  our lord knows that we have been sent to you .
they have made their oaths a screen . thus they hinderfrom the path of allah , so they shall have a humiliating torment .
you are purely a herald of warning .
o people who believe ! when you are told to give room in the assemblies , then do give room – allah will give you room ; and when it is said , “ stand up in reverence ” , then do stand up – allah will raise the believers among you , and those given knowledge , to high ranks ; and allah is aware of your deeds .
 o lord , help me against the wicked people ,  prayed .
when we relieved them from the torment they suddenly turned back on their heels .
 i wish , would that it had been my end !
and indeed yusufdid come to you , in times gone by , with clear signs , but you ceased not to doubt in that which he did bring to you , till when he died you said :  no messenger will allah send after him .  thus allah leaves astray him who is a musrifand a murtab .
the imminent hour has drawn near ,
then , when he gave them out of his bounty , they grew niggardly and turned their backs .
how well shall they hear and how well shall they see on the day they come to us ! but today the evil-doers are in manifest error .
it is said : enter ye the gates of hell to dwell therein . thus hapless is the journey 's end of the scorners .
when affliction befalls mankind they turn to him calling their lord in prayer , but when he lets them taste his mercy , some of them assign associates to their lord ,
there did not come to them any sign from among the signs of their lord , but that they used to disregard it .
o youenveloped !
we have indeed sent a noble messenger towards you , a present witness over you – the way we had sent a noble messenger towards firaun .
certainly there was a sign for saba in their abode ; two gardens on the right and the left ; eat of the sustenance of your lord and give thanks to him : a good land and a forgiving lord !
and you laugh at it and weep not ,
and those who believed afterwards and migrated and strove along with you : they belong to you . but those related by blood are nearer to one another according to the book of allah . allah has knowledge of everything .
and the earth throws out its burdens .
and preserved for them a good name among posterity .
indeed , we used to supplicate him before . indeed , it is he who is the beneficent , the merciful . 
knowing that they will be dealt out a punishment breaking the spine .
thereupon moses threw his rod , and suddenly it was a veritable serpent .
if allah were to punish men according to what they deserve . he would not leave on the back of thea single living creature : but he gives them respite for a stated term : when their term expires , verily allah has in his sight all his servants .
o believers , whosoever of you turns from his religion , god will assuredly bring a people he loves , and who love him , humble towards the believers , disdainful towards the unbelievers , men who struggle in the path of god , not fearing the reproach of any reproacher . that is god 's bounty ; he gives it unto whom he will ; and god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
lost indeed are they that cried lies to the encounter with god , so that when the hour comes to them suddenly they shall say , 'alas for us , that we neglected it ! ' on their backs they shall be bearing their loads ; o how evil the loads they bear !
pharaoh misled his people , and did not guide them .
he said , “ o moses , i have chosen you over all people for my messages and for my words . so take what i have given you , and be one of the thankful . ”
then we sent our messengers in succession . whenever a messenger came to his people they rejected him , calling him a liar . thereupon , we made each people to follow the other , reducing them to mere tales . scourged be the people who do not believe !
or hath he daughters whereas ye have sons ?
the tradition of allah prevalent among those who passed away before ; and you will never find the traditions of allah changing .
as for those who dispute about god after having answered his call , their argument is invalid with their lord ; and upon them falls wrath ; and a grievous torment awaits them .
in gardens and springs ?
he will not be questioned about what he does , but they will be questioned .
such are they against whom the statement is realized concerning the nations of humans and jinn alike that passed away before them ; they were the losers .
when he saw a fire , he said to his family : 'stay here , for i can see a fire . perhaps i can bring you a lighted torch or find at the fire guidance '
verily those who swear fealty unto thee , only swear fealty unto allah : the hand of allah is over their hands . so whosoever breaketh his oath , breaketh it only to his soul 's hurt ; and whosoever fulfilleth that which he hath convenanted with allah , him anon he shall give a mighty hire .
so if you have a strategy , use it against me .
say , ‘ have you regarded what allah has sent down for you ofprovision , whereupon you have made some of it unlawful andlawful ? ’ say , ‘ did allah give you the sanction , or do you fabricate a lie against allah ? ’
our lord , mete out to them a double chastisement and lay upon them a mighty curse . ”
our lord , whomsoever you admit into the fire , you will have abased , and the harmdoers shall have no helpers .
they say :  god has begotten a son .  immaculate is he and self-sufficient .  whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him . you have no proof for this : why do you say things of god you do not know ?
and those who keep proper regard for their trusts and their pledges .
and what would have happened were a qur'an to be revealed wherewith mountains could be set in motion , or the earth cleft , or the dead made to speak ? everything rests entirely with allah . so , do not the people of faithdespair as a result of knowing that had allah so willed , he could have guided all to the truth . misfortune continues to afflict the unbelievers on account of their misdeeds , or to befall on locations close to their habitation . this will continue until allah 's promiseis fulfilled . indeed allah does not go back upon his promise .
say : o mankind ! i am only a plain warner unto you .
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into it a second time , and loose against you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your thanklessness , then you will find no prosecutor for you against us ?
the ones who believe and are god-fearing .
certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of the men , but most people do not know
and he had no warrant whatsoever against them , save that we would know him who believeth in the hereafter from him who is in doubt thereof ; and thy lordtaketh note of all things .
whosoever is spared that day will surely have mercy shown to him , and this will be a clear triumph .
say :  ar-rahman extends the life of those who are astray until they come to realise what had been promised them was eitheraffliction orof resurrection . then will they know who is worse in position , and who is weak in supporters .
for those on the right .
so what is your opinion regarding the fire which you kindle ?
they said :  by allah ! indeed allah has preferred you above us , and we certainly have been sinners . 
rejoicing in god 's grace and bounty.god will not fail to requite the believers .
and could you see when they are made to stand before their lord . he will say : is not this the truth ? they will say : yea ! by our lord . he will say : taste then the chastisement because you disbelieved .
why should god punish you if you give thanks and believe in him ? god is all-rewarding and all-forgiving .
though before its coming they had despaired .
can leadinto temptation concerning allah ,
bethinkest thou , if he belieth and turneth away ?
say : 'have you considered ? if it be from god , and you disbelieve in it , and a witness from among the children of israel hears witness to its like , and believes , and you wax proud , god guides not the people of the evildoers .
but when they reached the junction between them , they forgot their fish , and it took its course into the sea , slipping away .
my lord ! you have bestowed dominion upon me and have taught me to comprehend the depths of things . o creator of heavens and earth ! you are my guardian in this world and in the hereafter . cause me to die in submission to you , and join me , in the end , with the righteous . 
now enter it . whether you behave patiently or impatiently will make no difference : you are only being repaid for what you have done .
then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his messenger and upon the believers and sent down soldiers angels whom you did not see and punished those who disbelieved . and that is the recompense of the disbelievers .
 so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
and who feedeth me and watereth me .
these are they on whom allah bestowed favors , from among the prophets of the seed of adam , and of those whom we carried with nuh , and of the seed of ibrahim and israel , and of those whom we guided and chose ; when the communications of the beneficent allah were recited to them , they fell down making obeisance and weeping .
hastening toward the summoner . the infidels will say : this is a day diffrcult .
among his signs are the ships sailing like mountains on the sea :
and our ancient ancestors too ? ”
and he it is who hath created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon , each in an orb floating .
and we created pairs of everything that you may contemplate .
when some of them said :  why do ye preach to a people whom allah will destroy or visit with a terrible punishment ?  - said the preachers :  to discharge our duty to your lord , and perchance they may fear him . 
said ,  fear not . indeed , i am with you both ; i hear and i see .
and they have taken gods beside allah that they might be unto them a glory . * chapter : 19
one day everything that can be in commotion will be in violent commotion ,
and frowned and puckered his brow ,
he will be a messenger of god to the israelites to whom he will say ,  i have brought you a miracle from your lord . i can create for you something from clay in the form of a bird . when i blow into it , it will become a real bird , by the permission of god . i can heal the blind and the lepers and bring the dead back to life , by the permission of god . i can tell you about what you eat and what you store in your homes . this is a miracle for you if you want to have faith .
then he whose deeds weigh heavy in the balance
said he , ‘ begone hence , blameful and banished ! whoever of them follows you , i will surely fill hell with you all . ’
they said , ‘ are you really joseph ? ! ’ he said , ‘ i am joseph , and this is my brother . certainly allah has shown us favour . indeed if one is godwary and patient allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous . ’
and pharaoh said ,  let me kill moses and let him call upon his lord . indeed , i fear that he will change your religion or that he will cause corruption in the land . 
so , o my people , weigh and measure with justness , and do not withhold things due to men , and do not spread corruption in the land , despoiling it .
have you not regarded those who were given a share of the book , who purchase error and desire that youshould lose the way ?
the shading branches of trees will come down low over them , and their clusters of fruit , will hang down where they are the easiest to reach .
and he will give you another favour , which is dear to you – the help from allah and an imminent victory ; and o dear prophet , give glad tidings to the muslims .
to him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth : it is he who gives life and death ; and he has power over all things .
that we may show theeof our greater portents ,
and with fir'awn , owner of the stakes -
the night a covering ,
allah is the creator everything , and he is over everything a trustee .
those who believe , and do not obscure their faith with wrongdoing—those will have security , and they are guided .
they will swear to you by allah when you return to them so that you may turn aside from them ; so do turn aside from them ; surely they are unclean and their abode is hell ; a recompense for what they earned .
and this quran is not such as could be forged by those besides allah , but it is a verification of that which is before it and a clear explanation of the book , there is no doubt in it , from the lord of the worlds .
man was created of haste . assuredly i shall show you my signs ; so demand not that i make haste .
he has sent down to you the book with the truth , confirming what preceded it ; and he has sent down the torah and the gospel
but if thou turn away from them , seeking mercy from thy lord , for which thou hopest , then speak unto them a reasonable word .
verily we have made it an arabic qur'an that you may understand .
moses said to his people : 'seek help from allah and be steadfast . the earth is allah 's , he bestows it on those of his servants he chooses . the end of things belongs to the god-fearing . '
when allah will say , “ o eisa , the son of maryam ! remember my favour upon you and your mother ; when i supported you with the holy spirit ; you were speaking to people from the cradle and in maturity ; and when i taught you the book and wisdom and the taurat and the injeel ; and when you used to mould a birdlike sculpture from clay , by my command , and blow into it – so itused to fly by my command , and you used to cure him who was born blind and cure the leper , by my command ; and when you used to raise up the dead , by my command ; and when i restrained the descendants of israel against you when you came to them with clear proofs , and the disbelievers among them said , ‘ this is nothing but clear magic ’ . ”
and if indeed you die or you are slain , certainly to allah shall you be gathered together .
we sent a revelation to moses saying ,  take away my servants by night and strike for them a dry path through the sea . have no fear of being overtaken and do not be afraid . 
so which then of your lord 's favors do you dispute ?
surely i wish that you should bear the sin committed against me and your own sin , and so you would be of the inmates of the fire , and this is the recompense of the unjust .
we rained down on them a shower . then see what was the end of the evil-doers .
for what sin she was killed .
the piercing star .
nor is it the word of the cursed shaitan ,
and for their faithlessness , and their uttering a monstrous calumny against mary ,
then eat of all the fruits , and go along the pathways of your lord , with precision . from their bellies emerges a fluid of diverse colors , containing healing for the people . surely in this is a sign for people who reflect .
it was said :  enter paradise .  he said :  would that my people knew !
we created man in distress .
say :  the truth is from your lord : so believe if you like , or do not believe if you will .  we have prepared for the sinners a fire which will envelope them in its tent . if they ask for water they will be helped to liquid like molten brass that would scald their mouths . how evil the drink , and evil the resting-place !
and others fettered in chains .
indeed , those who are near your lord are not prevented by arrogance from his worship , and they exalt him , and to him they prostrate .
will be eating from the tree of bitterness .
and he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six periods -- and his dominionon the water -- that he might manifest to you , which of you is best in action , and if you say , surely you shall be raised up after death , those who disbelieve would certainly say : this is nothing but clear magic .
but he cried lies , and rebelled ,
andthe day when it displays it
and he has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , all , from himself ; most surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect .
he said : cast it down , o moses !
:  are they not those of whom you had sworn and said : 'god will not have mercy on them ? enter paradise where you will have no fear or regret . ' 
those unbelievers of the people of the book and the idolaters wish not that any good should be sent down upon you from your lord ; but god singles out for his mercy whom he will ; god is of bounty abounding .
within it is a flowing spring .
so when they all reached in yusuf ’ s company , he kept his parents close to him , and said , “ enter egypt , if allah wills , in safety . ”
recall what time he ran away unto a laden ship .
and that : ‘ ‘ dedicate yourself to the religion , as a hanif , and never be one of the polytheists .
and pointed out to him the two conspicuous ways ?
and cushions set in a row ,
they were those who , when it was said to them ,  there is no god but god ,  behaved with insolence ,
and there is none among you who shall not pass over hell ; this is an obligatory affair , binding upon your lord .
one who comes into the presence of his lord with faith and righteous deeds
and behold , how was the end of their device ! for we destroyed them and their people all together .
beholdest thou him who taketh for his god his own vain desire , and allah hath sent him astray despite his knowledge , and hath sealed up his hearing and his heart , and hath set on his sight a covering ? who will guide him after allah ? will ye not then be admonished ?
they will bray in it and not be able to hear anything in it .
,  indeed , we arein debt ;
and indeed those before them had denied – therefore how did my rejection turn out !
invite to the way of your lord with wisdom and good instruction , and argue with them in a way that is best . indeed , your lord is most knowing of who has strayed from his way , and he is most knowing of who isguided .
he said : then if thou wilt follow me ask me not of anything until begin thereof some mention .
after them we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his chiefs . but they willfully rejected them . consider the end of the evil-doers .
said ,  you believed moses before i gave you permission . indeed , he is your leader who has taught you magic , but you are going to know . i will surely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides , and i will surely crucify you all . 
the people of nuhdeniedbefore them , they rejected our slave , and said :  a madman !  and he was insolently rebuked and threatened .
what ails you then , how you judge ?
 send the servants of god with me . i am a trustworthy messenger sent to you .
indeed it is up to us to put it together and to recite it .
allah has promised those who believeand do deeds of righteousness , that for them there is forgiveness and a great reward .
remember that we made a solemn covenant with the children of israel to this effect : worship none save allah : be good to your parents , to your relatives , to the orphans and to the helpless ; speak aright with the people : establish the salat and pay the zakat . but with the exception of a few , you all slid back from it and are paying no heed to it even now .
surely , getting up at nightis the most potent means of subduing the self and most suitable for the word .
those who reject our signs and the meeting in the hereafter , - vain are their deeds : can they expect to be rewarded except as they have wrought ?
say :  he is the benevolent ; in him do we believe , and in him do we place our trust . you will now realise who is in manifest error . 
but those who strive against our signs , trying to defeat them , will suffer a painful torment .
o people ! if you are in doubt about the resurrection , we created you from dust , then from a drop offluid , then from a clinging mass , then from a fleshy tissue , partly formed and partly unformed , so that we may manifestto you . we lodge in the wombs whateverwe wish for a specified term , then we bring you forth as infants , thenso that you may come of age.there are some of you who are taken away , and there are some of you who are relegated to the nethermost age , such that he knows nothing aftersome knowledge . and you see the earth torpid , yet when we send down water upon it , it stirs and swells , and grows every delightful kind .
and say to those who do not believe , “ act according to your ability ; and so will we . ”
andthe moon when it becomes full
while those who believe will exclaim : 'are these the self-same people who solemnly swore by allah that they were with you ? ' all their acts have gone to waste and now they are the losers .
when there comes god ’ s victory , and conquest .
] said :  verily , you know that these signs have been sent down by none but the lord of the heavens and the earth as clear . and i think you are , indeed , o fir'aundoomed to destruction ! 
were it notthat mankind would be one community , we would have made for those who defy the all-beneficent , silver roofs for their houses andstairways by which they ascend ,
do not make your oaths a means of deceiving one another or else your foot may slip after having been firm , and you may suffer evil consequences because of hindering people from the way of allah . a mighty chastisement awaits you .
like the striving of the people of firon and those before them ; they rejected our communications , so allah destroyed them on account of their faults ; and allah is severe in requiting .
nay ! were you witnesses when death visited yaqoub , when he said to his sons : what will you serve after me ? they said : we will serve your god and the god of your fathers , ibrahim and ismail and ishaq , one god only , and to him do we submit .
then neither the sky shed tears over them nor the earth . they were granted no respite .
then , on that day , ye will be asked concerning pleasure .
this is the reasoning we gave to abraham against his people , we raise in rank anyone we please , your lord is wise and aware .
would that you knew what the day of decision is !
then after that you will most surely die .
upon the day when the hypocrites , men and women , shall say to those who have believed , 'wait for us , so that we may borrow your light ! ' it shall be said , 'return you back behind , and seek for a light ! ' and a wall shall be set up between them , having a door in the inward whereof is mercy , and against the outward thereof is chastisement .
they also said ,  god , if this really is the truth from you , then rain down upon us stones from heaven , or send us some other painful punishment . 
thereafter we shall cause to follow them the latter ones .
o ye who believe , say not :  listen to us  but say  look upon us ,  and be ye listeners . for disbelievers is a painful doom .
say : obey allah and obey the apostle ; but if you turn back , then on him rests that which is imposed on him and on you rests that which is imposed on you ; and if you obey him , you are on the right way ; and nothing rests on the apostle but clear delivering .
but if they fail to respond to you , know that they follow their fancies . and who is more lost than him who follows his fancy without guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
but if they turn their backs , your duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
neither the riches nor the progeny of those who disbelieve will aught avail them with allah . they will be fuel for fire .
and do not pray , over any of them who has died - ever - or stand at his grave . indeed , they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were defiantly disobedient .
he said :  my clan seems mightier to you than god whom you neglect and push behind your backs . surely what you do is within the power of my lord .
whatever we have revealed to you from the book is all truth . it confirms what was revealed before . god sees his servants and is all-aware of them .
'and that the foolish among usor the polytheists amongst the jinns ] used to utter against allah that which was wrong and not right .
who said : surely allah has enjoined us that we should not believe in any apostle until he brings us an offering which the fire consumes . say : indeed , there came to you apostles before me with clear arguments and with that which you demand ; why then did you kill them if you are truthful ?
 he will speak to the people in the cradle and in manhood , and he will be one of the righteous . 
thereforedo not grieve because of what theysay ; indeed we know what they conceal and what they disclose .
and when their eyes are turned toward the companions of the fire , they say ,  our lord , do not place us with the wrongdoing people . 
or do they say : he has forged it . nay ! they do not believe .
give me good tidings ? ' they said , 'we give thee good tidings of truth . be not of those that despair . '
they swore their most solemn oaths that if a warner should ever come to them , they would be better guided than any other community . but when a warner did come to them , it only increased their aversion ,
and there was a share in their wealth for the beggar and the deprived .
in which will be of every fruit two kinds .
blame will lie on those who are rich yet ask your leave to stay behind . they prefer to stay with women who stay at home , and god seals their hearts ; so they do not understand .
an evil act is like a rotten tree torn out of the earth with nofirmness .
leave him to me , the one whom i created single .
and we send down in the qur ’ an that which is a cure for the muslims , and a mercy – and it increases only ruin for the unjust .
or do they say : 'he has fabricated it ' say : 'if i had fabricated it , then the sin rests upon me . i reject the sins you do '
“ take this shirt of mine , and lay it over my father ’ s face , and he will recover his sight . and bring your whole family to me . ”
seeing that they did reject faithbefore , and that theycaston the unseen from a position far off ?
behold ! how they lied against themselves ! and then failed them that which they had been fabricating .
surely your striving is to diverse ends .
and thosecarrying a load
he says : “ i have squandered enormous wealth . ”
and grains in the blades , and fragrant plants .
do they think that we do not hear their secrets and whispers ? we certainly can hear them and our messengers record it all .
, if they turn away from the truth , know that we did not send you to them as their overseer . your task is only to convey . indeed when we give man a taste of our mercy , he exults in it . but if any misfortune afflicts them on account of their deeds , man is utterly ungrateful .
and indeed he ) saw him ] in the clear horizon .
for them is the sustenance known to us .
to pharaoh and his nobles . but they followed the command of pharaoh and the command of pharaoh was not rightly directed .
then on the judgment-day he will humiliate them and say : where are my associates regarding whom ye have been causing cleavage ? those who have been vouchsafed knowledge will say : verily the humiliation to-day and ill-hap are upon the infidels-
and now i fear my kinsfolk after i am gone ; and my wife is barren . so give me , from thee , a kinsman
and not a sign we shewed them but it was greater than the like thereof ; and we laid hold of them with the torment that haply they might turn .
their recompense lies with their lord : gardens of eternity beneath which rivers flow ; therein they shall dwell , forever and ever . allah is well-pleased with them , and they are well-pleased with him . all this is for him who fears his lord .
on the day when we gather them all together , we shall say to those who ascribe partners , ‘ stay where you are—you and your partners ! ’ then we shall set them apart from one another , and their partners will say , ‘ it was not us that you worshipped .
the people were asked , 'will you assemble ?
and from whencesoever thou goest forth , turn thy face toward the sacred mosque , and wheresoever ye be , turn your face toward it , lest there should be with people an argument against you , except those of them who do wrong so fear them not , but fear me ; so that i may accomplish my favour upon you , and that ye may remain guided-
do you make it your provision to belie it ?
so i seized the unbelievers and how terrible was their torment .
on the day when their tongues , their hands , and their legs or feet will bear witness against them as to what they used to do .
such were the 'ad people : they rejected the signs of their lord and cherisher ; disobeyed his messengers ; and followed the command of every powerful , obstinate transgressor .
i have turned my face to him who originated the heavens and the earth , a man of pure faith ; i am not of the idolaters . '
so make no haste against them ; we only count out to them anumber .
and wert thou to ask them : who hath created the heavens and the earth ? they will surely say : allah . say thou : bethink ye then that those whom ye call upon beside allah , - could they if allah intended some hurt for me , remove his hurt ? or if he intended some mercy for me , could they withhold his mercy ? say thou : enough for me is allah ; in him the trusting put their trust .
god does not hold you accountable for your unintended oaths , but he holds you accountable for your binding oaths . the atonement for it is by feeding ten needy people from the average of what you feed your families , or by clothing them , or by freeing a slave . anyone who lacks the means shall fast for three days . that is the atonement for breaking your oaths when you have sworn them . so keep your oaths . thus god makes clear his revelations to you , that you may be grateful .
obedience and good words . and when the matterwas determined , if they had been true to allah , it would have been better for them .
'that is because you rejoiced in the earth without right , and were exultant .
then let him call out his gang !
those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because they said : our lord is allah - for had it not been for allah 's repelling some men by means of others , cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques , wherein the name of allah is oft mentioned , would assuredly have been pulled down . verily allah helpeth one who helpeth him . lo ! allah is strong , almighty -
say , ‘ it is allah who gives you life , then he makes you die . then he will gather you on the day of resurrection , in which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ’
and othersbound together in chains .
and they who when they spend , are neither extravagant nor parsimonious , andbetween these the just mean .
 go you with this letter of mine , and deliver it to them , then draw back from them , and see whatthey return . 
o ye who believe ! render not vain your almsgiving by reproach and injury , like him who spendeth his wealth only to be seen of men and believeth not in allah and the last day . his likeness is as the likeness of a rock whereon is dust of earth ; a rainstorm smiteth it , leaving it smooth and bare . they have no control of aught of that which they have gained . allah guideth not the disbelieving folk .
if you could only see when those who denied the truth are terrified , and there is no way out , and they are seized from a place nearby ;
it is he who has raised among the unlettered people a messenger from among themselves who recites his revelations to them , and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , for they had formerly been clearly misguided --
and they worship , beside allah , that which harmeth them not , nor profiteth them , and they say : these are our intercessors with god : say thou : apprise ye allah of that which he knoweth not in the heavens nor in the earth ? hallowed be he and exalted far above that which ye associate !
those who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever that which allah ordered to be joined , andmake mischief in the earth : those are they who are the losers .
 and remove the impediment from my speech ,
and whomsoever we cause to live long , we reduceto an abject state in constitution ; do they not then understand ?
o you who believe ! remember god 's blessings upon you ; when certain people intended to extend their hands against you , and he restrained their hands from you . so reverence god , and in god let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to a land having no herbage , then we bring forth thereby seed-produce of which their cattle and they themselves eat ; will they not then see ?
and indeed the disbelievers seem as if they would topple you with their evil gaze when they hear the qur ’ an , and they say , “ he is indeed insane . ”
we shall help you against those who mock you
on the day when every soul will come disputing for itself , and every soul will be fully compensated for what it did , and they will not be wronged .
say : 'what think you ? if it is from god , then you disbelieve in it , who is further astray than he who is in wide schism ? '
that you may not sorrow over what eludes you , nor exult over what he has given you . god does not love the proud snob .
she said :  this is the one you blamed me for . i did desire his person , but he preserved himself from sin . yet in case he does not do my bidding he will be put into prison and disgraced . 
in scorn thereof . nightly did ye rave together .
o believers , be you securers of justice , witnesses for god , even though it be against yourselves , or your parents and kinsmen , whether the man be rich or poor ; god stands closest to either . then follow not caprice , so as to swerve ; for if you twist or turn , god is aware of the things you do .
whether we show thee a part of that we promise them , or we call thee to us , it is thine only to deliver the message , and ours the reckoning .
and we appointed with moses thirty nights and we completed them with ten , so the appointed time of his lord was forty nights ; and moses said to his brother aaron , 'be my successor among my people , and put things right , and do not follow the way of the workers of corruption . '
the command of allah is arriving soon , therefore do not seek to hasten it ; purity and supremacy are to him , above all the partners .
say : 'see what is in the heavens and the earth ' but neither signs nor warnings help the unbelievers .
and i ask of you no wage therefor ; my wage is the concern only of the lord of the worlds .
no burden-bearer shall bear another 's burden , and if some over-laden soul should call out for someone else to carry his load , not the least portion of it will be borne for him , even though he were a near relative . you can only warn those who fear their lord in the unseen , and pray regularly . anyone who purifies himself will benefit greatly from doing so . to god all shall return .
for verily , they used not to look for a reckoning .
god does not do even an atom 's weight of injustice . a good deed is multiplied by god and richly rewarded .
indeed , allah does not forgive association with him , but he forgives what is less than that for whom he wills . and he who associates others with allah has certainly fabricated a tremendous sin .
and it became as though reaped .
commemorate enoch in the book . he was a truthful person and a prophet ,
it was we who created man , and we know what dark suggestions his soul makes to him : for we are nearer to him thanjugular vein .
when she saw him , she said ,  i seek refuge in the compassionate god from you ; if you fear the lord . 
he said : 'never so , go both of you with our signs ; we shall be with you , listening
those unto whom we have vouchsafed the book recognise him even as they recognise their children ; and verily a party of them hide the truth while they know .
for whom his evil deed has been embellished so that it looks fair to him ? the fact is that allah causes whomsoever he will to fall into error and shows the right way to whomsoever he will . so , , let not your life go to waste sorrowing over them . allah is well aware of all that they do .
i did not create the jinn and the humans except to worship me .
but we did not find therein save ahouse of those who submitted .
but none trusted moses , save some scions of his people , in fear of pharaoh and their chiefs , that he would persecute them . lo ! pharaoh was verily a tyrant in the land , and lo ! he verily was of the wanton .
do not abuse those whom they worship besides allah lest they become disrespectful towards allah ’ s majesty , through injustice and ignorance ; likewise , in the eyes of every nation , we have made their deeds appear good – then towards their lord they have to return and he will inform them of what they used to do .
and there came from the uttermost part of the city a man running . he cried : o my people ! follow those who have been sent !
and magnify your lord .
not equal are the companions of the fire and the companions of paradise . the companions of paradise - they are the attainers .
 and throw that which is in your right hand ! it will swallow up that which they have made . that which they have made is only a magician 's trick , and the magician will never be successful , no matter whatever amounthe may attain . 
and there will remain the countenance of thine lord , owner of majesty and beneficence .
surely we have given thee abundance ;
to how many a town we gave respite while it was given to wrongdoing . then i seized it . to me all things shall return .
or do those who commit evils think we will make them like those who have believed and done righteous deeds -equal in their life and their death ? evil is that which they judge .
it is he who shows you his signs and sends down provision for you from the sky . yet no one takes admonition except those who return penitently .
indeed allah is the knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . indeed , he knows well what is in the breasts .
to him belongs all supremacy in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
we gave them this reward – the recompense of their ingratitude ; and whom do we punish , except the ungrateful ?
say : ' i take refuge with the lord of men ,
nay , but they are in doubt , playing .
and man will be evidence against himself .
what , have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of those before them ? they were stronger than themselves in might ; but god -- there is naught in the heavens or the earth that can frustrate him . surely he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
your creation and your raisingare only asa single soul . lo ! allah is hearer , knower .
and we gave to him isaac and jacob -- each one we guided , and noah we guided before ; and of his seed david and solomon , job and joseph , moses and aaron -- even so we recompense the good-doers --
should we treat those who submit and obey in the same way as those who are culpable ?
know yethat allah giveth life to the earth after its death ! already have we shown the signs plainly to you , that ye may learn wisdom .
but none of them put faith in moses except some youths among his people who were nonetheless afraid lest the pharaoh and his nobles should persecute them ; for the pharaoh was mighty in the land , and guilty of excesses .
yet verily your lord is mighty and merciful .
and deliver us by thy mercy from the people of the unbelievers . '
] said :  the knowledge thereof is with my lord , in a record . my lord is neither unaware nor he forgets , 
verily , those who believe not in the hereafter , name the angels with female names .
 this , because ye used to take the signs of allah in jest , and the life of the world deceived you :  that day , therefore , they shall not be taken out thence , nor shall they be received into grace .
or do ye feel secure that he will not send you back a second time to sea and send against you a heavy gale to drown you because of your ingratitude , so that ye find no helper . therein against us ?
by no means he performed not that which he had commanded him .
as for those who denied the truth , neither their possessions nor their children will avail them against allah . they are the people of the fire , and therein they shall abide .
and you see the people entering into the religion of allah in multitudes ,
by no means ! he will be sure to be thrown into that which breaks to pieces ,
knows he not that allah does see ?
by the time !
surely firon exalted himself in the land and made its people into parties , weakening one party from among them ; he slaughtered their sons and let their women live ; surely he was one of the mischiefmakers .
we have appointed none but angels to guard the fire , and made their number only as a trial for the unbelievers , so that those to whom the book was given are certain and those who believe increase in belief . and that those who were given the book , and those who believe will not be in doubt . and that those in whose hearts there is a sickness , together with the unbelievers , may say : 'what did allah intend by this as an example ' as such , allah leaves in error whom he will and he guides whomsoever he will . none knows the hosts of your lord except he . this is no more than a reminder to humans .
when the single blast is sounded on the trumpet ,
the divorced women have the right to receive reasonable provisions . it is an obligation for the pious .
say : i know not whether that which ye are promised is nigh , or if my lord hath set a distant term for it .
and for allah that is not hard or difficult .
verily , those who have believed , and those who have emigratedand have striven hard in the way of allah , all these hope for allah 's mercy . and allah is oft-forgiving , most-merciful .
should we equate those who do the right with those who spread corruption in the land ? should we make those who are morally integrated equal to those who seek disintegration ?
and all praise be to allah , the lord of the universe .
for you we have made the sacrificial camel one of the reminders of god . it also has other benefits for you . consecrate it with the name of god when it is steadily standing . when it is slaughtered , consume its flesh and give part of it to the needy who do and those do not ask for help from others . thus we have made the camel subservient to you so that perhaps you may give thanks .
we shall remove all grudges from their hearts . they will enjoy the flowing streams in the garden and will say ,  god who guided us to this , deserves all praise . had he not guided us , we would never have been able to find the right direction . themessengers of our lord came to us with the truth .  they shall be told , 'this is the paradise which you have inherited because of your good deeds . 
why now turn they away from the admonishment ,
the fools among the people will say , 'what has turned them from the direction they were facing in their prayers aforetime ? ' say :  to god belong the east and the west ; he guides whomsoever he will to a straight path . '
you will not be able to be fair between wives , even if you are eager to do so . yet do not turn away from one altogether , leaving her as if in a suspense . but if you are conciliatory and godwary , allah is indeed all-forgiving , all-merciful .
his is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . and to allah return all the matters .
whenever our verses are recited to them , they say : 'we have heard them , if we wished , we could speak its like . they are but tales of the ancients '
ask them :  shall we invoke , apart from allah , something that can neither benefit nor harm us , and thus be turned back on our heels after allah has guided us ? like the one whom the evil ones have lured into bewilderment in the earth , even though he has friends who call him to true guidance saying :  come to us .  say :  surely allah 's guidance is the only true guidance , and we have been commanded to submit ourselves to the lord of the entire universe ,
and inspired itwhat is wrong for it andright for it .
the angels will descend on those who said : 'allah is our lord ' and have then gone straight , 'be neither fearful , nor sad ; rejoice in the paradise you have been promised .
and , by allah , i shall circumvent your idols after ye have gone away and turned your backs .
and when he wanted to strike the one who was an enemy to both of them , he said ,  o moses , do you intend to kill me as you killed someone yesterday ? you only want to be a tyrant in the land and do not want to be of the amenders . 
i shall cut off your hands and feet on the opposite sides , and then crucify you all . '
and of abraham , who fulfilled :
then on the day of resurrection before your lord you shall dispute .
and fruits such as they choose ,
how well they will hear and how well they will see on the day when they come to us ! but today the wrongdoers are in manifest error .
go about , then , in the land for four months . and know that verily ye can not escape allah , and that verily allah is the humiliator of the infidels .
indeed , those who have said ,  our lord is allah ,  and then remained on a right course - there will be no fear concerning them , nor will they grieve .
that outstrip him not in speech , and perform as he commands .
or , he couples them , both males and females , and to others , if he will , he makes them barren . surely , he is the knower , the powerful .
when he said to his father and his people , “ what do you worship ? ”
and my word shall not be changed , nor am i unjust to my servants . 
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – their welcome are the gardens of paradise .
it is made lawful for you to go in unto your wives on the night of the fast . they are raiment for you and ye are raiment for them . allah is aware that ye were deceiving yourselves in this respect and he hath turned in mercy toward you and relieved you . so hold intercourse with them and seek that which allah hath ordained for you , and eat and drink until the white thread becometh distinct to you from the black thread of the dawn . then strictly observe the fast till nightfall and touch them not , but be at your devotions in the mosques . these are the limits imposed by allah , so approach them not . thus allah expoundeth his revelation to mankind that they may ward off .
it is the samewhether any of you conceal his speech or declare it openly ; whether he lie hid by night or walk forth freely by day .
yet the people have set up , besides him , deities , who do not create anything but are themselves created : who can neither harm nor help even themselves : who have no power over life or death , nor can they raise up the dead .
then , as for those who believed and worked righteous works , their lord will cause them to enter into his mercy : that is a manifest achievement .
and they said , “ a jumble of dreams , ” and , “ he made it up , ” and , “ he is a poet , ” “ let him bring us a sign , like those sent to the ancients . ”
what is the life of this world but play and amusement ? but best is the home in the hereafter , for those who are righteous . will ye not then understand ?
and certainly we have revealed to you clear communications and none disbelieve in them except the transgressors .
did he not bring their plan to naught ?
and he gives life and gives death , and towards him you will return .
whosoever earns a sin , he only earns it against himself . allah is the knower , the wise .
and they say , “ the most merciful has taken to himself a son. ” be he glorified ; they are but honored servants .
in houses which allah has permitted to be exalted and that his name may be remembered in them ; there glorify him therein in the mornings and the evenings ,
and , our lord , make us submissive to thee , and of our seed a nation submissive to thee ; and show us our holy rites , and turn towards us ; surely thou turnest , and art all-compassionate ;
consider not that the disbelievers can escape in the land . their abode shall be the fire , and worst indeed is that destination .
he saw him indeed another time
when we let the people taste mercy after hardship has visited them , lo , they have a device concerning our signs . say : 'god is swifter at devising ; surely our messengers are writing down what you are devising . '
or may say that , “ if the book had been sent down to us , we would have been more upon guidance than them ” ; so the clear proof and guidance and mercy has come to you , from your lord ; so who is more unjust than one who denies the signs of allah , and turns away from them ? we shall soon punish those who turn away from our signs with a great punishment , the recompense of their turning away .
turn in repentance to your lord and submit to his will before you are afflicted with the torment after which you can receive no help .
one who is brought up among ornaments and who can not produce a cogent argument ? 
say :  he is the most beneficent , in him we believe , and in him we put our trust . so you will come to know who is it that is in manifest error . 
 my son , god keeps the records of all the good and evil deeds , even if they are as small as a grain of mustard seed , hidden in a rock or in the heavens or the earth . god is subtle and all-aware .
and dutiful to his parents , and he was not a disobedient tyrant .
will they not ponder upon the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and all that allah created , and that it may be that their term is drawing near ? so , in which speech will they believe thereafter ?
and do not be grieved by those who rush into disbelief . they do no harm to god ; and god will not give them any share in the life to come , and their torment shall be great .
he has bestowed on you cattle , and sons ,
the evil one threatens you with poverty and bids you to conduct unseemly . allah promiseth you his forgiveness and bounties . and allah careth for all and he knoweth all things .
and most of them do not believe in god unless they associate others .
ye will not be able to deal equally betweenwives , however much ye wish . but turn not altogether away , leaving her as in suspense . if ye do good and keep from evil , lo ! allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and it is but one shout and they are all arraigned before us .
that boat belonged to poor people who used to toil on the sea . i damaged it because there was a king after them who used to seize every ship by force .
and do not plead on behalf of those who act unfaithfully to their souls ; surely allah does not love him who is treacherous , sinful ;
those who deny the signs of allah and the encounter with him—they have despaired of my mercy , and for such there is a painful punishment .
and trust allah ; and allah is sufficient as a trustee .
and intercession does not benefit before him , except for one whom he permits ; to the extent that when the fear is removed from their hearts by giving permission , they say to each other , “ how splendidly has your lord spoken ! ” they say , “ all that he has proclaimed is the truth ; and he is the supreme , the great . ”
he said : my lord ! give me a sign . he said : your sign is that you will not be able to speak to the people three nights while in sound health .
have you not seen how allah has subjected to you all that is in the earth , and the vessels that sail in the sea by his command , and it is he who holds back the sky that it may not fall on earth except by his leave ? surely allah is most gentle , ever compassionate to people .
he brought out its water and its pastures from it ,
and naught prevented mankind from believing when the guidance came unto them save that they said : hath allah sent a mortal asmessenger ?
then we set you upon a clear course of the law ; so follow it , and do not follow the desires of those who do not know .
and those who glide smoothly .
o you who believe ! seek assistance through patience and prayer ; surely allah is with the patient .
indeed there is a punishment besides that for those who do wrong , but most of them do not know .
then followed heway ,
is then he who follows the pleasure of allah like him who has made himself deserving of displeasure from allah , and his abode is hell ; and it is an evil destination .
lblis said ; bethinkest thou : this one whom thou hast honoured above me- if thou deferrest me till the day of judgment , shall surely seize his progeny save a few .
shaping you into any form he pleased ?
they said : our lord ! we have been unjust to ourselves , and if thou forgive us not , and havemercy on us , we shall certainly be of the losers .
peace be with the messengers .
and they say ,  our hearts are wrapped .  nay , allah has cursed them for their disbelief , so little is that which they believe .
that day is sure to come , so whoever wishes to , let him take the path that leads towards his lord .
but those who deny our signs and are disdainful of them , they shall be the inmates of the fire and they shall remain in it .
however , to the righteously striving believers i shall give their reward in full measure .  god does not love the unjust .
and fight in the way of god with those ; who fight with you , but aggress not : god loves not the aggressors .
therefore we rectified for him this , and most surely he had a nearness to us and an excellent resort .
for half the night , or reduce some from it .
 truly this is what ye used to doubt ! 
do you not see that allah drives clouds ? then he brings them together , then he makes them into a mass , and you see the rain emerge from within it . and he sends down from the sky , mountainswithin which is hail , and he strikes with it whom he wills and averts it from whom he wills . the flash of its lightening almost takes away the eyesight .
those who do not believe in the hereafter – we have made their deeds seem good to them , so they are astray .
and among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of allah ; and allah is affectionate to the servants .
as for those whose faces will be whitened , they shall be in the mercy of allah for ever .
and put forward to them the example of two men ; unto one of them we had given two gardens of grapes , and we had surrounded both with date-palms ; and had put between them green crops .
and we made corn grow ,
and if you see the angels when they are removing the souls of the disbelievers , hitting them on their faces and their backs ; “ taste more of the punishment of the fire ! ”
they will say , “ our lord , whoever brought this upon us , give him double torment in the fire . ”
even thus shall we deal with the guilty .
we let the rain pour down in torrents
and rejects what is right ,
and inform them of the guests of ibrahim :
so that the evils of what they did smote them , and that which they used to mock surrounded them .
to god bows everything in the heavens , and every creature crawling on the earth , and the angels . they have not waxed proud ;
everyone that is thereon will pass away .
and appoint for me a helper from among my family ,
surely those who tormented the believing men and the believing women and then did not repent , theirs shall be the chastisement of hell , and theirs shall be the chastisement of burning .
we know best why it is they listen , when they listen to thee ; and when they meet in private conference , behold , the wicked say ,  ye follow none other than a man bewitched ! 
they did not recognise the true worth of allah.on the day of resurrection the whole earth will be in his grasp , and the heavens shall be folded up in his right hand . glory be to him ! exalted be he from all that they associate with him .
: “ do not remonstrate in my presence . i had warned you .
moses said ,  begone ! it shall be your lot to say throughout your life ,  do not touch me ,  and you will be faced with a fate from which there will be no escape . now look at your deity to which you have become so devoted : we shall burn it up , and then scatter it into the sea .
and his wife was standing by ; she laughed , therefore we gave her the glad tidings of isaac , and , after isaac , of jacob .
and we gave musa the book and made it a guidance to the children of israel , saying : do not take a protector besides me ;
to whom no warner had been sent that perhaps they might take heed , and that , on experiencing afflictions because of their own deeds , they may not say ,  lord , would that you had sent to us a messenger so that we could follow your revelations and become believers  .
then we laid hold of him and his hosts and flung them into the sea , and he was reproachable .
your lord will resurrect them all ; he is all-wise and all-knowing .
and if you find no one therein , still , enter not until permission has been given . and if you are asked to go back , go back , for it is purer for you , and allah is all-knower of what you do .
and we would surely have guided them on the right path .
that it is certainly they who will be helped ;
and that hour you are watching
and say : “ this is nothing but plain sorcery .
indeed they love this transitory life , and disregard a heavy day that is ahead of them .
we said to him ,  enter paradise ,  and he exclaimed :  would that my people knew
so they were neither able to stand up , nor were they able to take revenge .
and assuredly we have sent down unto you a book wherein is admonition for you ; will ye not then reflect ?
that they shall receive our help
and at dawn would ask forgiveness ,
so be wary of allah and obey me .
 nor will you worship that which i worship .
but those who feared their lord will have gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding eternally therein , as accommodation from allah . and that which is with allah is best for the righteous .
these , our nation have taken to themselves gods , other than allah . why do they not bring some clear authority regarding them ! who does greater evil than he who forges a lie against allah '
and , we sent its right answer to you in time and explained it all in the best manner ,
then if they disobey you , say :  i am innocent of what you do . 
lo ! we used to pray unto him of old . lo ! he is the benign , the merciful .
all that is in the heavens and the earth magnifies god ; he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and mount sinai .
fightingis ordained for you , abhorrent as it may be to you . you may dislike something although it is good for you , or like something although it is bad for you : god knows but you do not .
that they will be rewarded with bounties and favors from their lord and that god will not neglect the reward of the true believers .
when he said to his father and his people , 'what are these statues unto which you are cleaving ? '
no calamity befalls on the earth or in yourselves but is inscribed in the book of decrees , before we bring it into existence . verily , that is easy for allah .
believers , save your own souls , for if you have the right guidance , no one who strays can harm you . you will all return to god who will tell you about what you have done .
and they say : 'what is within the bellies of such-and-such cattle is exclusively for our males and is forbidden to our females ; but if it be born dead , they all may share in it . ' he will soon requite them for all that theyattribute to allah . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and have subdued them unto them , so that some of them they have for riding , some for food ?
and by the promised day .
verily in this is a sign but most of them do not believe .
indeed what is to come will be better for you than what has gone by .
the hour is coming ; i would conceal it that every soul may be recompensed for its labours .
said he , ‘ you are indeed among the reprieved . ’
those who had charged shu'ayb with lying became as though-they had never lived there ; it is they who became utter losers .
say , “ have you considered ? if god 's punishment descended on you suddenly or gradually , would any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people ? ”
you will find that the most people in enmity to the believers are the jews and idolaters , and that the nearest in affection to the believers are those who say : 'we are nazarenes ' that is because amongst them there are priests and monks ; and because they are not proud .
had theyremained steadfast in their religion , we would certainly have given them abundant water to drink
say : we believe in allah and what has been revealed to us , and what was revealed to ibrahim and ismail and ishaq and yaqoub and the tribes , and what was given to musa and isa and to the prophets from their lord ; we do not make any distinction between any of them , and to him do we submit .
he said , “ i shall take the refuge of a mountain – it will save me from the water ” ; said nooh , “ today there is none who can rescue from the punishment of allah , except upon whom he has mercy ” ; and the wave came in between them , so he remained amongst the drowning .
allah will neither forgive nor show the right way to those who believed , and then disbelieved , then believed , and again disbelieved , and thenceforth became ever more intense in their disbelief .
and we had certainly given to david and solomon knowledge , and they said ,  praiseto allah , who has favored us over many of his believing servants . 
and he was in the city , fearing , awaiting , when lo ! he who had asked his assistance the day before was crying out to him for aid . musa said to him : you are most surely one erring manifestly .
and a ban is laid on every town which we have destroyed , that they shall not return .
if we pleased we could take away what we have revealed to you . then you will not find any one to plead for it with us ,
to replace them with others better than them : nothing can prevent us from doing this ,
if you count the favors of allah , you could not number them . indeed , allah is forgiving and the most merciful .
for an appointed term ?
we made a curse pursue them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the disfigured .
 but whosoever turns away from my message , verily for him is a life narrowed down , and we shall raise him up blind on the day of judgment . 
have they not travelled in the land , and seen what was the end of those before them , and they were superior to them in power ? allah is not such that anything in the heavens or in the earth escapes him . verily , he is allknowing , allomnipotent .
and they say : whatsoever is in the bellies of such cattle is for our males alone and is forbidden unto our wives , and if it be born dead , then they all are partakers thereof . anon he shall requite them for their attribution verily he is wise , knowing .
those who said : 'allah is one of the three ' , certainly they disbelieved , for there is no god save the one god . and if they do not give up this claim , all who have disbelieved among them shall be subjected to painful chastisement .
those whoto be seen ,
that is how we deal with the guilty .
in fact , the unjust have followed their desires without knowledge . who will guide those whom god has caused to go astray ? no one will be their helper .
the day when they will come out of their graves in all haste as though rushing to their altars ,
it invites him who once turned his back and fled .
so they disputed with one another about their affair and kept the discourse secret .
and allah hath sent down from the heaven water , then he reviveth the earth thereby after the death thereof ; verily therein is a sign for a people who hearken .
some he has guided , and upon some justly is the straying ; for they had chosen the satans for supporters instead of allah and suppose themselves to be guided .
surely the day of decision is an appointed time ,
therefore proclaim thou the praises : for by the grace of thy lord , thou art nosoothsayer , nor art thou one possessed .
we saved him and those who were with him in the laden ship ,
your lord is certainly in wait .
from the evil of the sneaking whisperer ,
a brief enjoyment , and then hell shall be their abode ; ill is the resort !
the punishment shall be increased for him on the day of resurrection , and he will remain in it forever , with humiliation .
our mighty servants , who will chase you from house to house . this is a decree already ordained . we , then , gave you a chance to defeat your enemies with the help of increasing your wealth and offspring .
all the angels prostrated themselves ,
he created the heavens and the earth with truth and shaped you , giving you excellent shapes . and to him is your ultimate return .
how can you take it when you have been intimate with one another , and she has taken a solemn pledge from you ?
whether you reveal anything , or whether you conceal it , surely god has knowledge of everything .
say , ,  do you argue with us about allah while he is our lord and your lord ? for us are our deeds , and for you are your deeds . and we are sincereto him . 
and when they said , ‘ o allah , if this be the truth from you , rain down upon us stones from the sky , or bring us a painful punishment . ’
marry the single people among you and the righteous slaves and slave-girls . if you are poor , god will make you rich through his favor ; he is bountiful and all-knowing .
the evils of their deeds caught up with them . and the wrongdoers among these will also be afflicted by the evils of what they earned , and they can not prevent it .
and if there is a party of you who believe in that with which am sent , and another party who do not believe , then wait patiently until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of the judges .
then we said to them ,  go to the people who have treated our revelations as false.  so we annihilated those people utterly .
so glorify your lord , the most supreme .
you will not see therein a depression or an elevation . 
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth allah ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
in fact you imagined that the prophet and the faithful would never come back home ; and this seemed pleasing to your hearts , and you entertained evil thoughts . you are a people lost .
muhammad is not but a messenger.messengers have passed on before him . so if he was to die or be killed , would you turn back on your heels ? and he who turns back on his heels will never harm allah at all ; but allah will reward the grateful .
“ that is because of what your hands have committed , and because god is not unjust to the servants . ”
as for those who took to a mosque for sabotage and for defiance , and to cause division among the faithful , and for the purpose of ambushby those who have fought allah and his apostle before—they will surely swear , ‘ we desired nothing but good , ’ and allah bears witness that they are indeed liars .
perchance thou mayestto give up a part of what is revealed unto thee , and thy heart feeleth straitened lest they say ,  why is not a treasure sent down unto him , or why does not an angel come down with him ?  but thou art there only to warn ! it is allah that arrangeth all affairs !
is it you who brought it down from the clouds , or is it we who bring it down ?
o mankind ! be wary of your lord ! indeed the quake of the hour is a terrible thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allahconfirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the scripture threw away the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know !
o my lord , you have given me dominion and taught me the interpretation of dreams ; o creator of the heavens and the earth , you alone are my saviour in this world and the world to come ; let me die submitting to you , and place me among the upright . 
for those who respond to their lord is the best . but as for those who do not respond to him , even if they possessed everything on earth , and twice as much , they could not redeem themselves with it . those will have the worst reckoning ; and their home is hell—a miserable destination .
thus do we certainly reward the doers of good .
when your lord comes down with the angels , rank upon rank ,
to an orphan near of kin
except that of those who afterwards repent and reform themselves ; god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the likeness of what they spend in this world is the likeness of a wind which is extremely cold ; it struck the harvest of a people who did wrong aginst themselves and destroyed it , . allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites , and those in whose hearts is a disease , and the alarmists in the city do not cease , we verily shall urge thee on against them , then they will be your neighbours in it but a little while .
then allah sent a raven scratching in the earth to show him in what wise he might cover the corpse of his brother . he said : woe unto me was incapable of being like unto this raven so that i might cover the corpse of my brother ! and he became of the remorseful .
and the earth have we spread out , and placed therein firm hills , and caused each seemly thing to grow therein .
and we gave moses the scripture , that they may be guided .
so he rendered them like straw eaten up ?
and shall lead them astray , and shall engross them in vain desires , and i shall command them and they will cut off the ears of the cattle , and i shall command them and they will disfigure allah 's creation . ' he who took satan rather than allah for his guardian has indeed suffered a man-ifest loss .
he said , “ you are an unfamiliar people . ”
moses said ,  even if you should deny the truth , and all who dwell on earth together , god is self-sufficient , praiseworthy . 
those are the disbelievers , truly . and we have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment .
the guilty ones will be recognized by their faces and will be seized by their forelocks and feet .
so enjoy what you have gotten of booty in war , lawful and good , and be afraid of allah . certainly , allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
never comesto them of a renewed message from their lord , but they listen to it as in jest , -
allah mocks them and prolongs them in their transgressionthey wander blindly .
to him only belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and indeed allah only is the perfect , the most praiseworthy .
so glory be to him , in whose hand is the dominion of everything , and unto whom you shall be returned .
and say thou : the truth is from your lord ; let him therefore who will , believe , and let him who will , disbelieve . verily we have gotten ready for the wrong-doers a fire the awnings whereof shall encompass them ; and if they cry for relief they shall be relieved with water like the dregs of oil scalding their faces . 111 the drink , and vile the resting-place !
but when some bounty from god comes to you , he says—as if no affection existed between you and him— “ if only i had been with them , i would have achieved a great victory . ”
“ or do they benefit you or harm you ? ”
said :  you are of those allowed respite . 
therefore guard againstallah and obey me :
this -- taste it , andthat for the unbelievers is the chastisement of fire .
he said , “ this is the parting between you and me ; i shall now tell you the interpretation of the matters you could not patiently bear . ”
so they disputed , one with another , over their affair , but they kept their talk secret .
those who do not hope to meet us ask : 'why have no angels been sent to us ? why can we not see our lord ' how proud they are within themselves , and have become greatly disdainful .
but those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted into gardens beneath which rivers flow , to remain therein forever , by leave of their lord . their greeting therein will be : “ peace . ”
we have spread out the earth , fixed mountains thereupon and caused everything to grow to its proper weight
o people , if you should be in doubt about the resurrection , thenindeed , we created you from dust , then from a sperm-drop , then from a clinging clot , and then from a lump of flesh , formed and unformed - that we may show you . and we settle in the wombs whom we will for a specified term , then we bring you out as a child , and thenthat you may reach yourmaturity . and among you is he who is taken indeath , and among you is he who is returned to the most decrepitage so that he knows , afterknowledge , nothing . and you see the earth barren , but when we send down upon it rain , it quivers and swells and growsof every beautiful kind .
so we unleashed upon them an icy gale during ill-fated days , in order that we might make them taste a humiliating punishment in the life of the world . yet the punishment of the hereafter will be surely more disgraceful , and they will not be helped .
when he said to his father and his people , 'what do you serve ? '
those who said , “ god has made a covenant with us , that we shall not believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering to be consumed by fire. ” say , “ messengers have come to you before me with proofs , and with what you asked for ; so why did you assassinate them , if you are truthful ? ”
indeed , were you to know with certain knowledge ,
have they taken gods from the earth who raise ?
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not loose against you a squall of pebbles , then you shall know how my warning is ?
therein are two gushing fountains of water .
whoso bringeth a good deed , he will have better than the same ; while as for him who bringeth an ill-deed , those who do ill-deeds will be requited only what they did .
being ungrateful for what we have given them ! let them enjoy . soon they will know !
the people will question thee concerning the hour . say : 'the knowledge of it is only with god ; what shall make thee know ? haply the hour is nigh . '
many similar wayswere faced by nationsthat have passed away before you , so travel through the earth , and see what was the end of those who disbelieved .
he said : art thou come unto us that thou mayest drive us out of our land by thy magic , o musa !
that your lord is the only lord .
and if they attack you first , strike them ; this is the due punishment for such disbelievers . if , however , they desist from fighting , and know that allah is forgiving and merciful .
say ,  think , if theis from god and you have rejected it , then who has gone farther astray than the one who has wandered far from the truth ?
if you fear you can not be equitable to orphan girls , then marry women who are lawful for you , two , three , or four ; but if you fear you can not treat so many with equity , marry only one , or a maid or captive . this is better than being iniquitous .
then we drowned the restthereafter .
hameem .
surely it sends up sparks like palaces ,
while whoever has done the smallest particle of evil will see it .
from the earth we created you , and into it we will return you , and from it we will extract you another time .
surely that to which you call me has no say in this world or in the life to come , that our return is to god alone , and that the transgressors shall be the inmates of the fire .
then it seemed good to them , after they had seen the signs , that they should imprison him for a while .
 as for those who believe and do righteous deeds -- blissful is their end . 
o people , eat of what is lawful and clean in the earth and do not follow the ways of satan , for he is your avowed enemy .
in the gardens are two springs , overflowing with abundance .
about the great tiding ,
be devoted to the upright religion before the coming of the inevitable day when no one can escape from god and people will either be sent to paradise or hell . 
say ,  this is my way ; i invite to allah with insight , i and those who follow me . and exalted is allah ; and i am not of those who associate others with him . 
the hour of doom is drawing near and the moon is rent asunder .
he said : o iblis ! what aileth thee that thou art not among the prostrate ?
their requital will be hell , because they disbelieved and mocked my signs and messengers .
surely we have sent you with the truth as a bearer of good news and as a warner , and you shall not be called upon to answer for the companions of the flaming fire .
and disobeyedthe messenger of their lord ; so he punished them with an abundant penalty .
and the tall palm-trees having spadices closely set one above another ,
did he not find you an orphan , so provided you shelter ?
and they say :  what is there but our life in this world ? we shall die and we live , and nothing but time can destroy us .  but of that they have no knowledge : they merely conjecture :
and allah created you of dust , then of the life-germ , then he made you pairs ; and no female bears , nor does she bring forth , except with his knowledge ; and no one whose life is lengthened has his life lengthened , nor is aught diminished of one 's life , but it is all in a book ; surely this is easy to allah .
 till the day of the time appointed . 
‘ that is because of what your hands have sent ahead , and because allah is not tyrannical to the servants . ’
with downcast eyes they shall come out of their graves , as if they were locusts milling about
then most surely they shall eat of it and fillbellies with it .
when fetters will be placed around their necks and chains will drag them
it is he who created you from clay and then decreed a term and a specified timeto him ; thenyou are in dispute .
indeed only towards us is their return
for that cause we decreed for the children of israel that whosoever killeth a human being for other than manslaughter or corruption in the earth , it shall be as if he had killed all mankind , and whoso saveth the life of one , it shall be as if he had saved the life of all mankind . our messengers came unto them of old with clear proofs , but afterwards lo ! many of them became prodigals in the earth .
“ enter them with peace , in safety . ”
o you who believe ! verily , the mushrikunare najasun . so let them not come near al-masjid-al-haramafter this year , and if you fear poverty , allah will enrich you if he will , out of his bounty . surely , allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
and recall what time ibrahim said : my lord ! shew me how thou wiltquicken the dead . he said : belie vest thou not ! he said : o yea but that my heart may rest at ease . he said : take then thou four of the birds , and incline them towards thee , and then put a part thereof on each hill , and thereafter call them ; they will come unto thee speeding . and know thou that verily allah is mighty , wise .
 o my lord ! forgive me , my parents , all who enter my house in faith , andbelieving men and believing women : and to the wrong-doers grant thou no increase but in perdition ! 
as for him who gives and is godfearing
i take refuge with my lord and your lord lest you stone me .
lord , the idols have misled many people . whoever follows me is my friend . as for those who disobey , you are certainly all-forgiving and all-merciful .
theyfulfillvows and fear a day whose evil will be widespread .
and the people given the book said , “ none will enter paradise unless he is a jew or a christian ” ; these are their own imaginations ; say , “ bring your proof , if you are truthful . ”
there are signs in the heavens and the earth for those who believe :
then the bearers of weight ,
therefore guard againstallah and obey me :
 then they will be thrown headlong into the , - they and those straying in evil ,
or , lest it should say : had allah but guided me , i should surely have been of the god-fearing !
o men , a similitude is struck ; so give you ear to it . surely those upon whom you call , apart from god , shall never create a fly , though they banded together to do it ; and if a fly should rob them of aught , they would never rescue it from him . feeble indeed alike are the seeker and the sought !
an apostle who recites to you the clear communications of allah so that he may bring forth those who believe and do good deeds from darkness into light ; and whoever believes in allah and does good deeds , he will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers now , to abide therein forever , allah has indeed given him a goodly sustenance .
and so did the dwellers of midian , and moses too was branded a liar . initially i granted respite to the unbelievers for a while and then seized them . how dreadful was my punishment !
and the companions of the thicket and the people of tubba ' . all denied the messengers , so my threat was justly fulfilled .
he replied ,  i am not one to prostrate myself to a man whom you have created out of a clay of moulded mud . 
and he is allah ; there is no god except he . the praise is his in the former as in the latter . his is the judgement , to him you shall be returned .
so we heard him and gave him john , and cured his wife . these were men who vied in good deeds with one another , and prayed to us with love and awe , and were meek before us .
and whoso opposeth the messenger after the guidancehath been manifested unto him , and followeth other than the believer 's way , we appoint for him that unto which he himself hath turned , and expose him unto hell - a hapless journey 's end !
therefore , keep on preaching as long as it is of benefit .
its shades will be close over them and its clusterswill be hanging low .
this is the certain truth .
noah said :  o my lord ! they have disobeyed me , but they followwhose wealth and children give them no increase but only loss .
so we opened the gates of the cloud with water pouring
and they persisted in the great violation .
or have we sent down any authority upon them , such as speaks of that they associate with him ?
those who deny the scripture and that wherewith we send our messengers . but they will come to know ,
did we not destroy the ancients ,
no , we are being deprived . ”
bow instead in adoration before god and worship him .
a favor from us ; thus do we reward him who gives thanks .
' o our lord , ' said moses and aaron , 'truly we fear he may exceed against us , or wax insolent . '
god promised you that one of the two parties would fall to you , and you wished that the one without sting should be yours , but god wanted to establish the truth by his words and cut off the root of those who denied the truth --
 wheresoever you may be , death will overtake you even if you are in fortresses built up strong and high !  and if some good reaches them , they say ,  this is from allah ,  but if some evil befalls them , they say ,  this is from you .  say :  all things are from allah ,  so what is wrong with these people that they fail to understand any word ?
have we not created you in pairs ,
the dwellers of hell will eat that fruit and fill-up their bellies .
and korah , pharaoh , and haman . certainly , moses brought them manifest proofs , but they acted arrogantly in the land ; though they could not outmaneuver .
say : o my bondmen who believe ! observe your duty to your lord . for those who do good in this world there is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . verily the steadfast will be paid their wages without stint .
so there came upon the garden an affliction from your lord while they were asleep .
yet those who deny the truth persist in denial .
even such men as are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
leave mewith him whom i created lonely ,
the day when it reveals his radiance ,
nay , they reject that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge , and the final sequel of it has not yet come to them ; even thus did those before them reject ; see then what was the end of the unjust .
and whom i have provided with every resource ,
all the bad aspects of theseare hateful to your lord .
and recite to them the news of noah , when he said to his people ,  o my people , if my residence and my reminding of the signs of allah has become burdensome upon you - then i have relied upon allah . so resolve upon your plan andyour associates . then let not your plan be obscure to you . then carry it out upon me and do not give me respite .
it is he who brings out the living from the dead , and brings out the dead from the living , and who gives life to the earth after it is dead : and thus shall ye be brought out .
those against whom the word is realized they shall say , 'our lord , those whom we perverted , we perverted them even as we ourselves erred . we declare our innocence unto thee ; it was not us that they were serving . '
so we showed him all our signs , but he denied them and refused ,
o mankind , we have created you male and female , and appointed you races and tribes , that you may know one another . surely the noblest among you in the sight of god is the most godfearing of you . god is all-knowing , all-aware .
then you went astray , you that belied ,
for such the abode is only hell from which they will find no escape .
we called out to him from the right side of the mountain , and drew him near inconversation .
or are we to treat those who believe and do righteous deeds like those who make trouble on earth ? or are we to treat the pious like the shameless ?
he is dominant over all his creatures and he sends guards to watch over you until death approaches you . then his angelic messengers will , without fail , take away your souls .
say , ‘ he will revive them who produced them the first time , and he has knowledge of all creation .
and allah drave back those who disbelieved in their rage ; they obtained no advantage , and allah sufficed for the believers in the fighting ; and allah is ever strong , mighty .
they will say , 'god 's . ' say : 'will you not then be godfearing ? '
‘ and that we sometimes used to sit in some places in the sky , to listen ; so whoever now listens finds a fiery comet waiting for him . ’
 verily , i intend to let you draw my sin on yourself as well as yours , then you will be one of the dwellers of the fire , and that is the recompense of the zalimun . 
and everything , small and great , hath been written down .
that which ye lay out for increase through the property ofpeople , will have no increase with allah : but that which ye lay out for charity , seeking the countenance of allah , : it is these who will get a recompense multiplied .
“ i then called them openly . ”
did we not make the earth a resting place ?
mentionone of 'ad'sbrethren : behold , he warned his people about the winding sand-tracts : but there have been warners before him and after him :  worship ye none other than allah : truly i fear for you the penalty of a mighty day . 
but those who knew better , said :  alack-a-day ! god 's guerdon is better for those who believe and do the right . only those who persevere will receive it . 
degrees from him , and forgiveness , and mercy . god is forgiving and merciful .
do they really believe that an all-embracing punishment of god will not come upon them , or the day of doom overtake them suddenly while they remain unaware ?
whom allah cursed , and he said : surely i will take of thy bondmen an appointed portion ,
he truly beheld himon the clear horizon .
and eat of that wherewith allah hath provided you as lawful and clean ; and fear allah in whom ye are believers .
the heavens are about to be rent apart from above them , while the angels celebrate the praise of their lord and plead for forgiveness for thosewho are on the earth . indeed , allah is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful !
it is he who sends down the rain after they have been despondent , and unfolds his mercy , and he is the guardian , the all-laudable .
he who sends down water from the sky in due proportion ; and so we revive thereby a dead land . thus you will be brought out .
when you said ,  moses , we can not bear to eat only one kind of food , so pray to your lord to bring forth for us some of the earth 's produce , its herbs and cucumbers , its garlic , lentils , and onions .  moses said ,  would you take a lesser thing in exchange for what is better ? go to some town and there you will find all that you demand .  abasement and destitution were stamped upon them , and they incurred the wrath of god , for having rejected his signs , and they killed his prophets unjustly , because they were rebels and transgressors .
go with this letter of mine , and deliver it to them ; then withdraw from them , and see how they respond . ”
i follow the religion of my fathers , abraham , isaac and jacob ; and it is not for us to associate anyone with god as a partner . this is of god 's grace upon us and upon mankind ; even though most men are not grateful .
perish the hands of the father of flame ! perish he !
the chieftains of his people , who were scornful , said : surely we will drive thee out , o shu'eyb , and those who believe with thee , from our township , unless ye return to our religion . he said : even though we hate it ?
those before them also schemed , but god took their structures from the foundations , and the roof caved in on them . the punishment came at them from where they did not perceive .
had you seen them in the cave it would have appeared to you that when the sun rose , it moved away from their cave to the right ; and when it set , it turned away from them to the left , while they remained in a spacious hollow in the cave . this is one of the signs of allah . whomsoever allah guides , he alone is led aright ; and whomsoever allah lets go astray , you will find for him no guardian to direct him .
and do not eat anything over which god 's name has not been pronounced , for that surely is disobedience . the devils inspire their followers to argue with you . if you obey them , you will become of those who associate partners with god .
moses said ,  certainly not . my lord is with me and he will certainly guide me . 
when they entered into the presence of david , he was alarmed by them . they said , ‘ do not be afraid.two contenders : one of us has bullied the other . so judge justly between us , and do not exceed , and show us the right path . ’
they begrudged them only because they believed in god the almighty , the praiseworthy .
seest thou ? if we do let them enjoyfor a few years ,
said :  o our father , pray for us that our sins be forgiven , for we are really sinners . 
those to whom the people said : 'the people have gathered against you , therefore fear them ' but it increased them in belief and they said : 'allah is sufficient for us . he is the best guardian '
certainly allah took a pledge from the children of israel , and we raised among them twelve chiefs . and allah said , ‘ i am with you ! surely , if you maintain the prayer and give the zakat and have faith in my apostles and support them and lend allah a good loan , i will surely absolve you of your misdeeds , and i will surely admit you into gardens with streams running in them . but whoever of you disbelieves after that has certainly strayed from the right way . ’
so , , persevere with gracious perseverance .
my lord , they have led so many men astray ! anyone who follows me is with me , but if anyone turns against me , you are surely forgiving and merciful .
indeed , their refuge shall be paradise .
and if you speak aloud - then indeed , he knows the secret and what ismore hidden .
as for the faithless , their lot will be to fall , and he will render their works fruitless .
and the disbelievers said , “ will we , when we and our forefathers have turned into dust , be removed again ? ”
say :  tell me , - if his torment should come to you by night or by day , - which portion thereof would the mujrimunhasten on ? 
and of the evil ones , were some who dived for him , and did other work besides ; and it was we who guarded them .
but as for those who deny our signs , the punishment shall befall them because of the transgressions they used to commit .
leave me with him whom i created alone ,
it may be god will yet establish between you and those of them with whom you are at enmity love . god is all-powerful ; god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
said ,  the knowledge thereof is with my lord in a record . my lord neither errs nor forgets . 
but moses said ,  indeed , i have sought refuge in my lord and your lord from every arrogant one who does not believe in the day of account . 
i want no sustenance from them nor do i want them to feed me .
that which she worshipped , other than allah , had prevented her , for she came from an unbelieving nation .
—those who fulfill allah ’ s covenant and do not break the pledge solemnly made ,
they will say : our lord ! our wretchedness overcame , us , and we have been a people erring .
verily ! in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
enter your hand into the opening of your bosom , it will come forth white without evil , and draw your hand to yourself to ward off fear : so these two shall be two arguments from your lord to firon and his chiefs , surely they are a transgressing people .
so when you want to recite the quran , seek refuge with allah from shaitan , the outcast .
and we taught him the art of making the coats of mail for you that it may protect you from your violence ; are ye then thankful ?
but god is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and worship himof the night . and glorify him through the livelong night .
mocked weremessengers before thee : but i granted respite to the unbelievers , and finally i punished them : then howwas my requital !
and we certainly sent noah to his people , and he remained among them a thousand years minus fifty years , and the flood seized them while they were wrongdoers .
allah 's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . and assuredly we enjoined those who were vouchsafed the book before you and yourselves : fear allah , and if ye disbelieve then allah 's is whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth ; and allah is ever self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
every soul shall taste death ; we test you with both good and evilas a trial . to us you shall return .
who is it who guides you through the darkness on land and sea ? and who sends winds as heralds of good tidings ahead of his mercy ? is there any god associated with allah ? exalted be allah above whatever they associate with him in his divinity !
say , ,  my lord has ordered justice and that you maintain yourselvesat every placeof prostration , and invoke him , sincere to him in religion .  just as he originated you , you will return-
in houses which allah has allowed to be raised up , and his name to be remembered therein . in the morning and evening
is not god the greatest of the judges ?
among them are those who believe in it , and among them are those who do not believe in it . your lord is fully aware of the mischief-makers .
do you invoke baal and abandon the best of creators ,
and who brings forth herbage ,
alas for human beings ! they ridicule every messenger that comes to them .
and if we willed , we could surely do away with that which we revealed to you . then you would not find for yourself concerning it an advocate against us .
and approach not the substance of an orphan save with that which is best until he attaineth his age of strength , and fill up the measure and balance with equity- we burthen not a soul except according to its capacity and when ye speak , be fair , even though it be against a kinsman ; and the covenant of allah fulfil . thus he enjoineth you that haply ye may be admonished .
the balance that day will be true : those whose scalewill be heavy , will prosper :
and listens and obeys its lord , and it must do so ;
so they hamstrung the she-camel , and insolently defied the commandment of their lord , saying ,  o salih ! bring upon us what you threaten us with if you are indeed a messenger . 
when they came in unto him and said : peace ! he answered , peace ! : folk unknown .
yet when they see some commerce or amusement they flock to it , leaving you standing . say : 'that which is with allah is better than the amusement and commerce . allah is the best of providers '
and clusters of banana plants .
say , ‘ allah suffices as witness between me and you . indeed he is well aware his servants and a keen observer . ’
let him who does not believe in it and follows his lust not turn your thought away from it , lest you are ruined .
ask them :  who is the lord of the seven heavens , the lord of the great throne ? 
and he united their hearts . had you spent everything on earth , you would not have united their hearts , but god united them together . he is mighty and wise .
indeed , those who believe and do righteous deeds - for them is a reward uninterrupted .
and who has measured ; then guided ;
he hath aided you with cattle and sons .
and a tongue and two lips ?
 the only reason you have to hate us is that we believed in the signs of our lord as they came to us . o our lord , give us sufficient endurance that we may die submitting . 
in that which your wives leave , your share is a half if they have no child ; but if they leave a child , you get a fourth of that which they leave after payment of legacies that they may have bequeathed or debts . in that which you leave , theirshare is a fourth if you leave no child ; but if you leave a child , they get an eighth of that which you leave after payment of legacies that you may have bequeathed or debts . if the man or woman whose inheritance is in question has left neither ascendants nor descendants , but has left a brother or a sister , each one of the two gets a sixth ; but if more than two , they share in a third ; after payment of lagacies hemay have bequeathed or debts , so that no loss is caused . this is a commandment from allah ; and allah is ever all-knowing , most-forbearing .
and after that he spread the earth .
they will carry their own loads and other loads besides their own ; and will surely be questioned on the day of resurrection about what they contrived .
whoever obeys allah and his apostle , and fears allah and is wary of him—it is they who will be the triumphant .
our lord ! give them double torment and curse them with a mighty curse ! 
their eyes will be lowered and disgrace will cover them . they had certainly been told to prostrate themselves before god when they were safe and sound .
will you not then take admonition ?
god has decreed ,  i and my messenger shall certainly triumph .  god is all-powerful and majestic .
in the perspicuous arabic tongue .
indeed , he knows what is declared of speech , and he knows what you conceal .
when they despaired of him , they went in private to confer together . the eldest said : 'do you not know that your father took a pledge from you in the name of allah , and that you failed before regarding joseph ? i shall never stir from this land until my father gives me leave or allah makes known to me his judgement : he is the best of judges .
and from his wife and his children .
but i shall send them a present and see with what reply my envoys will return . 
but because of their breach of their covenant , we cursed them , and made their hearts grow hard ; they change the words from theirplaces and forget a good part of the message that was sent them , nor wilt thou cease to find them- barring a few - ever bent ondeceits : but forgive them , and overlook : for allah loveth those who are kind .
the great terror shall grieve them not , and the angels will meet them : this is your day which ye were ever promised-
if you have to retaliate , do so to the extent you have been injured ; but if you forbear it is best for those who bear with fortitude .
and each one of them will come unto him on the day of resurrection , alone .
they have therein what they wish and with us is more yet .
and that those who do not believe in the hereafter - we have prepared for them a painful punishment .
truly , that day , they willshare in the penalty .
his command is only when he intends a thing that he says to it ,  be ,  and it is .
believe , therefore , in allah and his messenger , and in the light which we have sent down . and allah is well acquainted with all that ye do .
and : we had sought the heaven but had found it filled with strong warders and meteors .
a multitude from the former
or , do you ask a tribute from them ? your lord 's tribute is better . he is the best of providers .
truly man is , to his lord , ungrateful ;
whenever a new message comes to them from the beneficent god , they turn away from it .
who created death and life that he might examine which of you is best in deeds , and he is the almighty , the forgiving ,
here is protection only allah 's , the true one ; he is best inreward and best in requiting .
so they said : on allah we rely : o our lord ! make us not subject to the persecution of the unjust people :
he will surely not bid you make the angels and the prophets your lords . would he order you disbelief after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he will and has mercy to whom he will . to him you shall be turned .
thisis a message for mankind , in order that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that he is the only one ilah- , and that men of understanding may take heed .
andzachariah , john , jesus and elias , each was of the righteous ,
now , if you are in doubt concerning what we have revealed to you , then ask those who have been reading the book before you . it is the truth that has come to you from your lord , so do never become one of those who doubt ,
believers , be dutiful to allah and bearers of just witness . do not allow your hatred for other people to turn you away from justice . deal justly ; it is nearer to piety . have fear of allah ; allah is aware of what you do .
knowest thou not that to allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? and besides him ye have neither patron nor helper .
he said :  my lord ! how can i have a boy when my wife is barren and i have reached an extremely old age ? 
the dwelling place of one who comes into the presence of his lord as a criminal will be hell wherein he will never die nor enjoy his life .
worship besides him whatever you want . the greatest losers are those whose souls and family members will be lost on the day of judgment for this is certainly a great loss  .
he is lord of the two easts and lord of the two wests .
say : i only call upon my lord , and i do not associate any one with him .
that is because they loved this present life above the everlasting life . allah does not guide the unbelievers .
we divided them into twelve tribes or nations . we directed moses by inspiration , when hispeople asked him for water :  strike the rock with thy staff  : out of it there gushed forth twelve springs : each group knew its own place for water . we gave them the shade of clouds , and sent down to them manna and quails , :  eat of the good things we have provided for you  : ; to us they did no harm , but they harmed their own souls .
her father said to moses :  i want to marry one of these two daughters of mine to you if you serve me for eight years . but if you complete ten years , that will be of your own accord . i do not intend to treat you harshly . if allah wills , you will find me an upright man . 
and they say , “ what lies in the wombs of these animals is exclusively for our males , and prohibited to our wives. ” but if it is stillborn , they can share in it . he will surely punish them for their allegations . he is wise and knowing .
when he was standing during prayer in his place of worship , the angels called him saying ,  god gives you the glad news of the birth of your son , john who will be a confirmation ofthe word of god . he will become a chaste , noble leader and one of the righteous prophets .
follow those who ask no wage of you and are rightly guided .
sad . by the quran , full of admonition !
to god the case of jesus is as that of adam whom he created from the earth and then said ,  exist ,  and adam came into existence .
upon couches they will gaze ,
they shall say , 'what , are we being restored as we were before ?
do they want to suffer our torment immediately ?
but allah was not going to chastise them while you were among them , nor is allah going to chastise them while yet they ask for forgiveness .
and , follow the inspiration sent unto you , and be patient till allah gives judgement . and he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we carry water to the parched earth and with it we bring forth crops , from which they eat , themselves and their cattle ? will they not then see ?
he said : this is that which we have been seeking . so they retraced their steps again .
when we decide to destroy a town we command the affluent among them , whereupon they commit sins in it , then the decreebecomes due against them and thereafter we destroy that town utterly .
allah has not made cattle , a slit eared shecamel , nor a freely grazing shecamel , nor a shecamel that bore twins , nor an uncastrated camel , but those who disbelieve invent lies against allah . most of them do not understand .
he has set two seas in motion that flow side by side together ,
and guard yourselves against the fire that is prepared for the disbelievers .
they will go to one another asking each other questions :
wives of the prophet , you are not like other women . if you have fear of god , do not be tender in your speech lest people whose hearts are sick may lust after you .
and when our verses are recited to them as clear evidences , you recognize in the faces of those who disbelieve disapproval . they are almost on the verge of assaulting those who recite to them our verses . say ,  then shall i inform you ofworse than that ? the fire which allah has promised those who disbelieve , and wretched is the destination . 
we shall make thee recite , to forget not
those with whom you have made a covenant , and who break their covenant on every occasion and have no fear .
but if , while waiting for your lord 's bounty which you are expecting , you turn them down , then at least speak to them kindly .
god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they remove ; did they remove , none would hold them after him . surely he is all-clement , all-forgiving .
when you are among them , and you stand to lead them in prayer , let a group of them stand with you , and let them hold their weapons . then , when they have done their prostrations , let them withdraw to the rear , and let another group , that have not prayed yet , come forward and pray with you ; and let them take their precautions and their weapons . those who disbelieve would like you to neglect your weapons and your equipment , so they can attack you in a single assault . you commit no error , if you are hampered by rain or are sick , by putting down your weapons ; but take precautions . indeed , god has prepared for the disbelievers a demeaning punishment .
and in our sight , they are indeed the chosen ones , the beloved .
they said : 'we went racing and left joseph with our things . the wolf devoured him , but you will not believe us , though we speak the truth '
so that he shall recompense those who believe and work righteous works out of his grace ; verily he loveth not the infidels .
do they feel secure that the punishment of allah will envelop them , or that the hour will overtake them suddenly when they are unaware ?
say to them : 'people of the book ! do you hate us for anything else except that we believe in allah , and in the teaching which has been revealed to us and in the teaching which was revealed before ? indeed most of you are transgressors . '
and he said : surely i fly to my lord ; he will guide me .
and none shall bind as he binds .
we certainly know that they say , ‘ it is only a human that instructs him. ’ the language of him to whom they refer is non-arabic , while this is a clear arabic language .
so eat and graze your cattle . in this there are signs for men of understanding .
say : do ye bid me serve other than allah ? o ye fools !
and the book which we have divinely revealed to you – that is the truth , confirming the books which were before it ; indeed allah is aware of his bondmen , all seeing .
nay ! hehas come with the truthand he confirms the messengers .
this is their repayment for having blasphemed against our revelations , and having said , “ shall we , when we have become bones and fragments , be resurrected as a new creation ? ”
have we not made the earth as a cradle
theywill present their excuses to you , when you return to them . say  present no excuses , we shall not believe you . allah has already informed us of the news concerning you . allah and his messenger will observe your deeds . in the end you will be brought back to the all-knower of the unseen and the seen , then hewill inform you of what you used to do . 
we had no power over you , but ye were wayward folk .
the hypocrites are afraid lest a surah should be revealed concerning them intimating to the believers what lay hidden in their hearts . tell them :  continue your mockery if you will . allah will surely bring to light all that whose disclosure you dread . 
'now you have come to us one by one , as we created you upon the first time , and you have left what we conferred on you behind your backs . we do not see with you your intercessors , those you asserted to be associates in you ; the bond between you is now broken ; that which you ever asserted has now gone astray from you .
also mention in the bookmoses : for he was specially chosen , and he was a messengera prophet .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he grants life and causes death . god is your only guardian and helper .
and forgive my father , for surely he is of those who have gone astray ;
and you will see the criminals that day bound together in shackles ,
the believers are but brethren , therefore make peace between your brethren and be careful ofallah that mercy may be had on you .
the noble messenger believes in what has been sent down to him by his lord , and so do the believers ; all have accepted faith in allah and his angels and his books and his noble messengers ; saying , “ we do not make any distinction , in believing , between any of his noble messengers ” ; and they said , “ we hear , and we obey ; your forgiveness be granted , o our lord , and towards you is our return . ”
and the true promise shall draw nigh , then lo ! the eyes of those who disbelieved shall be fixedly open : o woe to us ! surely we were in a state of heedlessness as to this ; nay , we were unjust .
and when they opened their belongings they found that their means had been returned to them ; they said , “ o our father ! what more can we ask for ? here are our means returned to us ; we may get the provision for our homes and guard our brother , and get a camel-load extra ; giving all these is insignificant for the king . ”
and among them are those who listen to you . but can you cause the deaf to hear , although they will not use reason ?
do they say , ‘ he has improvised it ? ’ rather , they have no faith !
to him shall you return , all together -- god 's promise , in truth . he originates creation , then he brings it back again that he may recompense those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , justly . and those who disbelieve -- for them awaits a draught of boiling water , and a painful chastisement , for their disbelieving .
the torment will be doubled to him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein in disgrace ;
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah whereas he is being called towards islam ? and allah does not guide the unjust people .
o people , fear your lord and dread the day when no father will avail a son , nor son his father . truly the promise of god is true . do not be deluded by the life of this world , and do not let the deceiver draw you away from god .
 enter ye therein in peace and security ; this is a day of eternal life ! 
then therein he shall neither live nor die .
what would allah do with your punishment if you are grateful and believe ? and ever is allah appreciative and knowing .
jesus , son of mary , said ,  o god , our lord ! send down for us a table spread with food from heaven , so that it may be a feast for us , for the first of us and for the last of us : a sign from you . give us our sustenance , for you are the best of sustainers . 
who cause corruption in the land and do not amend . 
and his people argued with him . he said , “ do you argue with me about god , when he has guided me ? i do not fear what you associate with him , unless my lord wills it . my lord comprehends all things in knowledge . will you not reconsider ?
while they have no knowledge thereof . they follow but a guess , and verily , guess is no substitute for the truth .
verily they think that the chastisement is far off ,
said ,  to prove that my interpretation of your dream is true , i can tell you what kind of food you will receive even before it comes to you . my lord has given me such talents . i have given up the tradition of the people who do not believe in god and the day of judgment
alike of you is he who hideth the saying and he who noiseth it abroad , he who lurketh in the night and he who goeth freely in the daytime .
and to thamood their brother salih ; he said , ' o my people , serve god ! you have no god other than he ; there has now come to you a clear sign from your lord -- this is the she-camel of god , to be a sign for you . leave her that she may eat in god 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest you be seized by a painful chastisement .
you will see them being exposed to it , humbled by abasement , furtively looking askance . the faithful will say , ‘ indeed the losers are those who have ruined themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . indeed , the wrongdoers will abide in lasting punishment .
but she in whose house he was , sought to seduce him from hisself : she fastened the doors , and said :  now come , thou !  he said :  allah forbid ! trulyis my lord ! he made my sojourn agreeable ! truly to no good come those who do wrong ! 
and on the day when he shall call unto them and say : where are my partners whom ye pretended ?
fie upon you and that you serve apart from god ! do you not understand ? '
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
woe to you ] ! and thenwoe to you !
say :  surely if men and jinns get together to produce the like of this , they will not be able to produce the like of it , however they might assist one another .
and this they kept repeating until we caused them to become like a field mowed down , and reduced to ashes .
his companion will say : o our lord ! caused him not to transgress but he was himself in error far off .
then if they argue with you , say , “ i have submitted my faceto allah and likewise have my followers ” ; and say to the people given the book and the illiterate , “ have you submitted ? ” if they submit , they have attained the right path – and if they turn away , then your duty is only to convey this command ; and allah is seeing the bondmen .
tell them , : “ did you ever consider : if this qur'an is indeed from allah and you still deny it , who can be in greater error than he who goes far in fiercely opposing it ? ”
andit is said to those who are the muttaqun  what is it that your lord has sent down ?  they say :  that which is good .  for those who do good in this world , there is good , and the home of the hereafter will be better . and excellent indeed will be the homeof the muttaqun .
enter the gates of hell to abide eternally therein , and wretched is the residence of the arrogant . 
it is he who sent down out of heaven water , and thereby we have brought forth the shoot of every plant , and then we have brought forth the green leaf of it , bringing forth from it close-compounded grain , and out of the palm-tree , from the spathe of it , dates thick-lustered , ready to the hand , and gardens of vines , olives , pomegranates , like each to each , and each unlike to each . look upon their fruits when they fructify and ripen ! surely , in all this are signs for a people who do believe .
and whatsoever it be wherein ye differ the decision thereof is with allah ; such is allah , my lord : in him put my trust and unto him i turn in penitenance .
o believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him , even as you are listening ;
tell them :  bring your witnesses to testify that god has forbidden this .  then even if they testify , you should not testify with them ; and do not follow the wishes of those who deny our signs and believe not in the hereafter , and make others the equal of their lord .
but the unbelieversin self-glory and separatism .
or enjoined guarding ?
the people of nuhbelied the messengers .
and when he was fully grown , we gave him judgment and knowledge . even so we recompense the good-doers .
then by oath of those that lift and carry .
and if thou be in doubt concerning that which we have sent down unto thee , then ask those who have read the books before thee . assuredly hath the truth come unto thee from thy lord , so be not then of the doubters .
deemest thou that the people of the cave and the inscription were of our signs a wonder ?
for them , hell will be both a cradle and a blanket . thus do we punish the unjust .
and among mankind is he who worshippeth allah upon a narrow marge so that if good befalleth him he is content therewith , but if a trial befalleth him , he falleth away utterly . he loseth both the world and the hereafter . that is the sheer loss .
as for those of your women who are guilty of immoral conduct , call upon four from amongst you to bear witness against them . and if four men do bear witness , confine those women to their houses until either death takes them away or allah opens some way for them .
no one can guide those whom god lets go astray : he leaves them blundering about in their arrogance .
he who fearswill heed the reminder ,
lo ! allah graspeth the heavens and the earth that they deviate not , and if they were to deviate there is not one that could grasp them after him . lo ! he is ever clement , forgiving .
allah bestows wisdom on whomever he wills ; and whoever receives wisdom has received abundant goodness ; but none heed advice except men of understanding .
have you not seen that god sends down water from the sky ? with it we produce fruits of various colors . and in the mountains are streaks of white and red—varying in their hue—and pitch-black .
and to establish them in the land ; and to show pharaoh and haman , and their armies , the very thing they dreaded .
everything we narrate to you of the history of the messengers is to strengthen your heart therewith . the truth has come to you in this , and a lesson , and a reminder for the believers .
and we built above you seven strong ones ,
indeed some people before you had asked such questions and in consequence fell into unbelief .
he knows what is in the heavens and on earth ; and he knows what ye conceal and what ye reveal : yea , allah knows well theofhearts .
it is a terrible abode and an evil station , 
they reduce the help towards you ; so when a fearful time comes , you will observe them looking at you with eyes rolling like one enveloped by death ; then when the time of fear is over , they begin slandering you with sharp tongues in their greed for the war booty ; they have not accepted faith , therefore allah has nullified their deeds ; and this is easy for allah .
 now - as another sign - place your hand under your arm and it will come out sheer white without harm .
read , for your lord is most beneficent ,
for their breaking the covenant , and their rejection of the signs of allah , and for slaying prophets without right , and for saying : 'our hearts are wrapped up in covers ' -even though in fact allah has sealed their hearts because of their unbelief , so that they scarcely believe
and had we destroyed them with chastisement before this , they would certainly have said : o our lord ! why didst thou not send to us an apostle , for then we should have followed thy communications before that we met disgrace and shame .
said ,  no . go both of you with our signs ; indeed , we are with you , listening .
and grant me a reputation of honor among later generations .
are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do ?
the pharaoh and his army were puffed-up with pride in the land for no true cause . they thought that they would never return to us .
who give what they give , with their hearts quaking , that they will return to their lord :
virtue does not consist in whether you face towards the east or the west ; virtue means believing in god , the last day , the angels , the book and the prophets ; the virtuous are those who , despite their love for it , give away their wealth to their relatives and to orphans and the very poor , and to travellers and those who ask , and to set slaves free , and who attend to their prayers and pay the alms , and who keep their pledges when they make them , and show patience in hardship and adversity , and in times of distress . such are the true believers ; and such are the god-fearing .
we destroyed the others
a warning unto humankind -
we sent to the tribe of thamud their brother salih so that they would worship god , but they became two quarrelling groups .
 now put thy hand into thy bosom , and it will come forth white without stain : among the nine signsto pharaoh and his people : for they are a people rebellious in transgression . 
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit - how wretched the protector and how wretched the associate .
do not say about anything , ‘ i will indeed do it tomorrow , ’
when those who were followed disown those who followed , and they behold the doom , and all their aims collapse with them .
indeed allah will indeed judge between the faithful , the jews , the sabaeans , the christians , the magians and the polytheists on the day of resurrection . indeed allah is witness to all things .
what is the inevitable hour ?
said :  verily thou wilt not be able to have patience with me ! 
thou hadst no hope that the scripture would be inspired in thee ; but it is a mercy from thy lord , so never be a helper to the disbelievers .
whether you reveal a thing or conceal it , allah has knowledge of all things .
those who bear the throne , and those who are around it , celebrate the praise of their lord and have faith in him , and they plead for forgiveness for the faithful : ‘ our lord ! you embrace all things in mercy and knowledge . so forgive those who repent and follow your way and save them from the punishment of hell .
indeed , those whoaccuse chaste , unaware and believing women are cursed in this world and the hereafter ; and they will have a great punishment
i am a trustworthy messenger to you :
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people . then he tarried among them for a thousand years , save tifty years ; and then deluge overtook them , while they were wrong-doers .
of the people there are some who say :  we believe in allah and the last day ;  but they do notbelieve .
obedience and saying what is just would become them more ; when the decision is taken , it would be better for them if they acted sincerely towards god .
o muslims , fight in the way of allah and know that allah hears everything and knows everything .
and the trumpet is blown , and all who are in the heavens and all who are in the earth swoon away , save him whom allah willeth . then it is blown a second time , and behold them standing waiting !
i am afraid that you will suffer the torment of the day of judgment . 
so withdraw from themon the day when the summoner summoneth unto a painful thing .
their likeness is as the likeness of one who kindled a fire ; then , when it lighted all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darkness.they could not see .
verily in this is a sign : but most of them do not believe .
o you who have faith ! the polytheists are indeed unclean : so let them not approach the holy mosque after this year . should you fear poverty , allah will enrich you out of his grace , if he wishes . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
“ and do not disgrace me on the day when everyone will be raised . ”
and you will see many of them striving with one another to hasten in sin and exceeding the limits , and their eating of what is unlawfully acquired ; certainly evil is that which they do .
with neither hollows nor upthrust mounds to be seen .
so did you observe the idols lat and uzza ?
they said :  if you do not desist , o lot , you will be expelled . 
lo ! allah preferred adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran abovecreatures .
they said :  beseech on our behalf thy lord to make plain to us what she is : to us are all heifers alike : we wish indeed for guidance , if allah wills . 
we bestowed knowledge on david and solomon and they both said ,  praise be to god who has exalted us above many of his believing servants . 
we had assigned to them companions who embellished for them all that was before them and behind them . thus the same decreewhich had overtaken the previous generations of jinn and human beingsbecame due against them . surely they became the losers .
we did not create this heaven and earth and all that lies between them in vain . that is the fancy of those who denied the truth . so woe from the fire to all who deny the truth .
none shall enter it but the most wicked ,
o o ye who believe ! eat of the clean things wherewith we have provided you , and return thanks unto allah , if him indeed ye are wont to worship .
, ask them ,  who gives you sustenance from the heavens and earth , who truly possesseshearing and seeing abilities , who brings the living out of the dead and the dead out of the living and who regulates ? they will reply ,  god .  ask them ,  why , then , do you not have fear of him ? 
they built for him as many temples as he wished , and figures , basins like cisterns , and caldrons fixed . ‘ o house of david , act thankfully , and few of my servants are grateful . ’
say , “ indeed my lord has guided me to the straight path ; the right religion , the community of ibrahim who was free from all falsehood ; and was not a polytheist . ”
then proclaim the praise of thy lord , and seek his forgiveness ; for he turns again unto men .
white and delicious to those who drink it ,
o ye people of the book ! surely there hath come our apostle unto you expounding unto you much in the book that ye were wont to hide , and much he passeth over . of a surety , there hath come unto you from allah a light and a book luminous .
but he replied : ' i shall seek refuge on a mountain , which will protect me from the water ' hesaid : 'today , there is no defender from the command of allah , except those to whom he has mercy ' and the waves came between them , and he was drowned .
the jews said , “ ezra is the son of god , ” and the christians said , “ the messiah is the son of god. ” these are their statements , out of their mouths . they emulate the statements of those who blasphemed before . may god assail them ! how deceived they are !
when our revelations are recited to them , they turn back on their heels out of pride as if they did not hear them or their ears had been sealed off . warn them of the painful torment .
remaining in it timelessly , for ever , as long as the heavens and earth endure , except as your lord wills . your lord carries out whatever he wills .
help yourselveswith patience and prayer . it is a difficult task indeed , but not for the humble ones
or take heed and derive benefit fromwarning ?
they want to extinguish god ’ s light with their mouths ; but god will complete his light , even though the disbelievers dislike it .
neither shall they hear any of its whisper , but shall live for ever in that their souls desired .
praise be to allah , who createdthe heavens and the earth , who made the angels , messengers with wings , - two , or three , or four : he adds to creation as he pleases : for allah has power over all things .
know that the life of this world is only play and amusement , pomp and mutual boasting among you , and rivalry in respect of wealth and children , as the likeness of vegetation after rain , thereof the growth is pleasing to the tiller ; afterwards it dries up and you see it turning yellow ; then it becomes straw . but in the hereaftera severe torment , andforgiveness from allah andgood pleasure , whereas the life of this world is only a deceiving enjoyment .
soon will i cast him into hell-fire !
and themothers should nurse their children for two whole years , if they wish to complete the period of nursing ; and during that period the father of the child shall be responsible for the maintenance of the mother in a reasonable manner . no soul is charged with more than it can bear . no mother should be made to suffer on account of her child , and no father should be made to suffer on account of his child . the same duties devolve upon the father 's heir . but if , after consultation , they choose by mutual agreement to wean the child , there shall be no blame on them . nor shall it be any offence for you if you desire to engage a wet-nurse for your children , provided you hand over what you have agreed to pay , in a reasonable manner . have fear of god and know that god is observant of all your actions .
and remember , moses said to his people :  o my people ! why do ye vex and insult me , though ye know that i am the messenger of allahto you ?  then when they went wrong , allah let their hearts go wrong . for allah guides not those who are rebellious transgressors .
until when he comes before us he will say :  would to god there was a distance of the east and west between you and me , for you were an evil companion ! 
the path of those whom thou hast favoured . not of those on whom is indignation brought down , nor of the astray .
and we send down , of the koran , that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers ; and the unbelievers it increases not , except in loss .
know that the messenger of allah is among you . if he were to obey you in many matters , you would surely suffer . but allah has endeared the belief to youand beautified it in your hearts , and has made detestable to you disbelief , wrongdoing , and disobedience . such are those who are righteous
they say :  if we were to follow the guidance with thee , we should be snatched away from our land .  have we not established for them a secure sanctuary , to which are brought as tribute fruits of all kinds , - a provision from ourselves ? but most of them understand not .
and they give food out of love for him to the poor and the orphan and the captive :
he said : reprieve me till the day when they are raised .
a provision forslaves . and we give life therewith to a dead land . thus will be the resurrection .
a barrier shall be raised between them and what they desired , as was done with their partisans before . they too were filled with disquieting doubt .
and similarly we have revealed this as a command in arabic ; and o listener , if you follow their desires after the knowledge having come to you , then you will have neither a supporter nor any saviour against allah .
and we set up the heaven as a roof well-protected ; yet still from our signs they are turning away .
but he whom god guides can not be led astray by anyone . is god not mighty and capable of retribution ?
and when you said to him to whom allah had shown favor and to whom you had shown a favor : keep your wife to yourself and be careful ofallah ; and you concealed in your soul what allah would bring to light , and you feared men , and allah had a greater right that you should fear him . but when zaid had accomplished his want of her , we gave her to you as a wife , so that there should be no difficulty for the believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons , when they have accomplished their want of them ; and allah 's command shall be performed .
but none believed in musaexcept the offspring of his people , because of the fear of fir'aunand his chiefs , lest they should persecute them ; and verily , fir'aunwas arrogant tyrant on the earth , he was indeed one of the musrifun .
as to those who reject faith , - if they had everything on earth , and twice repeated , to give as ransom for the penalty of the day of judgment , it would never be accepted of them , theirs would be a grievous penalty .
when our decree came to pass , we mercifully saved shu'ayb and his faithful followers . a blast struck the unjust and left them in their homes , lying motionless on their faces ,
have they not contemplated the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and everything created by god , that perhaps their own term is drawing to a close ? in what lore after this would they then believe ?
do they have another god besides god ? god is too exalted to be considered equal to the idols .
no fault it is upon you that ye enter houses uninhabited wherein there is some property for you ; and allah knoweth that which you disclose and that which ye hide .
and when the children among you come to puberty , then let themask for permission , as those senior to them . thus allah makes clear his ayatfor you . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
say : can ye see yourselves , if the punishment of allah come upon you unawares or openly ? would any perish save wrongdoing folk ?
which will neither be cool nor soothing .
god decides with justice . but those they call apart from him can not adjudge in the least . verily god is all-hearing , all-perceiving .
we certainly know that some among you do deny it .
these hypocrites watch you closely : if victory is granted to you by allah , they will say : 'were we not with you ? ' and were the unbelievers to gain the upper hand , they will say : 'did we not have mastery over you , and yet we protected you from the believers ? ' it is allah who will judge between you on the day of resurrection , and he will not allow the unbelievers , in any way , to gain advantage over the believers .
and marry those among you who are single and those who are fit among your male slaves and your female slaves ; if they are needy , allah will make them free from want out of his grace ; and allah is ample-giving , knowing .
say to those who have disbelieved , if they ceasetheir past will be forgiven . but if they return , then the examples of thosebefore them have already preceded .
why , then , have armlets of gold not been set upon him , or angels sent along with him ?
then , on that day , will the imminentbefall
alif , lam , meem , saad .
and if you turn away from them to seek mercy from your lord , which you hope for , speak to them a gentle word .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them , who were more imposing in respect of gear and outward seeming !
you say :  yes ; and you will be lowly made . 
your god is one god ; there is no god other than he , the compassionate , ever-merciful .
he created man from dry clay like earthen vessels ,
or , do they say : 'he has forged it ' say : 'if i have forged it , then you have no power to help me against allah , he knows what you say . it is sufficient that heis the witness between me and you . he is the forgiving , the most merciful '
and serve thy lord till the inevitable cometh unto thee .
so inform them of a painful punishment ,
and cast thou down that which is in thy right hand : it shall swallow up that which they have wrought ; they have wrought only a magician 's stratagem ; and the magician prospereth not wheresoever he cometh .
they have cried lies , and followed their caprices ; but every matter is settled .
now had he not been of those that glorify god ,
no blame is there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any blame upon the sick nor on yourselves if ye eat from your houses , or the houses of your fathers , or the houses of your mothers , or the houses of your brothers , or the houses of your sisters , or the houses of your fathers ' brothers , or the houses of your fathers ' sisters , or the houses of your mothers ' brothers , or the houses of your mothers ' sisters , orwhereof ye hold the keys , orof a friend . no sin shall it be for you whether ye eat together or apart . but when ye enter houses , salute one another with a greeting from allah , blessed and sweet . thus allah maketh clear his revelations for you , that haply ye may understand .
you will see the wicked on that day bound together in chains .
those who dispute concerning the communications of allah without any authority that he has given them ; greatly hated is it by allah and by-those who believe . thus does allah set a seal over the heart of every proud , haughty one .
we shall surely raise the dead to life and we record what they did and the traces of their deeds that they have left behind . we have encompassed that in a clear book .
so we let loose on them floods and locusts , and vermin , frogs and blood -- how many different signs . but they still remained arrogant , for they were a people full of sin .
when we revealed what was revealed unto thy mother :
and thou seest the hills thou deemest solid flying with the flight of clouds : the doing of allah who perfecteth all things . lo ! he is informed of what ye do .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the scripture , who believe in superstition and false objects of worship and say about the disbelievers ,  these are better guided than the believers as to the way  ?
your women are a tilth for youso go to your tilth as ye will , and sendbefore you for your souls , and fear allah , and know that ye willmeet him . give glad tidings to believers , .
bear patiently with what they say and with a fine abandonment forsake them .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and what has been sent down to him , they would not have taken them for allies . but most of them are transgressors .
the life of this world is nothing but a diversion and play . indeed , the everlasting residence is the eternal life , if they but knew .
the duty of the messenger is only to convey . allah knoweth what ye proclaim and what ye hide .
molten thereby shall be that which is in their bellies and also their skins .
verily thou art mortal , and verily they are mortals .
they had certainly promised god that they would not turn away . to promise god is certainly aresponsibility .
so thereupon raising dust .
then he cast down his staff , and lo ! it was a serpent manifest .
but if they endeavor to make you associate with me that of which you have no knowledge , do not obey them but accompany them inworld with appropriate kindness and follow the way of those who turn back to me . then to me will be your return , and i will inform you about what you used to do .
also a tree springing out of mount sinai , which produces oil , and relish for those who use it for food .
there is nothing but our present life ; we die , and we live , and we shall not be raised up .
unquestionably , they the disbelievers turn away their breasts to hide themselves from him . unquestionably , when they cover themselves in their clothing , allah knows what they conceal and what they declare . indeed , he is knowing of that within the breasts .
and a food that choketh and a torment afflictive .
and pharaoh , he of the tent-pegs ,
these are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter : their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped .
on a straight path .
“ and when it was said , ‘ indeed allah ’ s promise is true and there is no doubt regarding the last day ” , you used to say , ‘ we do not know what the last day is – we think it is nothing except an imagination , and we are not convinced . ’ ”
then when musacame to them with our clear ayat , they said :  this is nothing but invented magic . never did we hear of this among our fathers of old . 
corruption has appeared in the land and sea , for that men 's own hands have earned , that he may let them taste some part of that which they have done , that haply so they may return .
and at the mountains—how they are installed ?
should he learn anything about our signs , he takes them in derision . for such there is a humiliating punishment .
o ye who believe ! take not for protectors your fathers and your brothers if they love infidelity above faith : if any of you do so , they do wrong .
then made the latter ones follow them ?
except the chosen bondmen of allah .
and notfor anyone who hasa favor to be rewarded
by grace from allah and as a favor ; and allah is knowing , wise .
turning unto him ; and be careful of your duty unto him and establish worship , and be not of those who ascribe partners ;
o dear prophet , a book has been sent down upon you , therefore may not your heart be disinclined towards it , so that you may give warning with it , and as an advice for the muslims .
we did not send a warner to any town without its affluent ones saying , ‘ we indeed disbelieve in what you have been sent with . ’
and approach not the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better , till he reach maturity . give full measure and full weight , in justice . we task not any soul beyond its scope . and if ye give your word , do justice thereunto , even though it bea kinsman ; and fulfil the covenant of allah . this he commandeth you that haply ye may remember .
the messengers replied : “ your evil omen is with you.because you were asked to take heed ? the truth is that you are a people who have exceeded all bounds . ”
say : 'the evil and the good are not alike , even if the abundance of evil pleases you . have fear of allah , you who are possessed of minds , in order that you prosper '
and if a blast of the chastisement of your lord were to touch them , they will certainly say : o woe to us ! surely we were unjust .
remember when moses said to his people ,  o my people ! remember god 's favour to you , he has raised up prophets among you , made you kings , and granted yousuch as he has not granted to anyone else in the world .
they said , ‘ by allah ! you certainly know that we did not come to make trouble in this country , and we are not thieves . ’
they think the allies are not gone , and if the allies should comethey would fain be in the deserts with the desert arabs asking for news about you , and if they were among you they would not fight save a little .
surely we will try them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore that they would certainly cut off the produce in the morning ,
so when they saw our punishment , they said :  we believe in allah alone and rejectthat we used to associate with him aspartners .
that is the true day ; so whosoever wills takes unto his lord a resort .
and when they forgot that by which they had been reminded , we saved those who had forbidden evil and seized those who wronged , with a wretched punishment , because they were defiantly disobeying .
 excepting the adherents of lut : them we are certainlyto save , - all -
o people ! fear your lord . the catastrophe of the last hour shall be terrible indeed :
canst thou then make the deaf to hear , or give direction to the blind or to such asin manifest error ?
and verily we shall try you till we know those of you who strive hardand the steadfast , and till we test your record .
 those who would hinderfrom the path of allah and would seek in it something crooked : they were those who denied the hereafter . 
their prophet further told them ,  as the evidence of his authority , he will bring to you the ark which will be a comfort to you from your lord and a legacy of the household of moses and aaron . it will be carried by the angels . this is the evidence for you if you have faith . 
we were promised that before , we and our ancestors—these are nothing but legends of the ancients . ”
who have enraged us greatly .
so we sent the divine revelation to moosa that , “ strike the sea with your staff ” ; thereupon the sea parted ; so each part was like a huge mountain .
verily ibrahim was a pattern , devout unto allah , upright , and , not of the associaters .
“ my lord , you have given me some authority , and taught me some interpretation of events . initiator of the heavens and the earth ; you are my protector in this life and in the hereafter . receive my soul in submission , and unite me with the righteous . ”
who denies and turns away .
the day it comes , no soul shall speak save by his leave ; some of them shall be wretched and some happy .
allah did indeed fulfil his promise to you when ye with his permission were about to annihilate your enemy , -until ye flinched and fell to disputing about the order , and disobeyed it after he brought you in sightwhich ye covet . among you are some that hanker after this world and some that desire the hereafter . then did he divert you from your foes in order to test you but he forgave you : for allah is full of grace to those who believe .
and the heaven shall be rent in sunder , it on that day shall be frail .
approach him and say , ` we are the messengers of your lord ; so let the children of israel go with us , and do not torment them . we bring you a sign from your lord , and peace be upon him who follows guidance .
those against whom the word of your lord will be realized will not believe ,
and wide-eyed houris
lo ! herein is indeed a portent , yet most of them are not believers .
and we have left this as a sign : then is there any that will receive admonition ?
to him belong all that is in the heavens and earth , surely , allah is the rich , the praised .
and in the alternation of the night and day , in the provision allah sends down from heaven with which the earth is revived after its death , and in the changing about of the winds , there are signs for people who understand .
“ and o my people ! seek forgiveness from your lord , then incline towards him in repentance – he will send abundant rain from the sky upon you and will give you much more strength than you have – and do not turn away committing crimes ! ”
and when a surah was revealedto believe in allah and to fight with his messenger , those of wealth among them asked your permissionand said ,  leave us to be with them who sit . 
had they marched out with you , they would have added to you nothing except disorder , and they would have hurried about in your midstand sowing sedition among you , and there are some among you who would have listened to them . and allah is the all-knower of the zalimun .
then the evildoers will see the fire , and think that they are about to fall into it , and will find no escape from it .
truth is what comes from your lord ; therefore , do not be of those who doubt .
and the mountains become like wool ,
the holders back from among the believers , not having any injury , and those who strive hard in allah 's way with their property and their persons are not equal ; allah has made the strivers with their property and their persons to excel the holders back adegree , and to eachallah has promised good ; and allah shall grant to the strivers above the holders back a mighty reward :
he said :  o chiefs ! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me surrendering themselves in obedience ? 
and they will cry , “ o malek , let your lord finish us off. ” he will say , “ you are staying . ”
in gardens of felicity ,
certainly we sentbefore you to former communities ,
o children of adam ! let not satan seduce you as he caused yourparents to go forth from the garden and tore off from them their robethat he might manifest their shame to them . lo ! he seeth you , he and his tribe , from whence ye see him not . lo ! we have made the devils protecting friends for those who believe not .
“ when your sister went , then said , ‘ shall i show you the people who may nurse him ? ’ and we brought you back to your mother in order to soothe her eyes and that she may not grieve ; and you killed a man , so we freed you from sorrow , and tested you to the maximum ; you therefore stayed for several years among the people of madyan ; then you cameat an appointed time , o moosa . ”
which will inevitably seize the disbelievers .
there every soul shall prove its past deeds ; and they shall be restored to god , their protector , the true , and there shall go astray from them that they were forging .
how can allah guide people who once believed , after they received clear signs and affirmed that the messenger was a true one , lapsed into disbelief . allah does not guide the wrong-doers .
and in moses : behold , we sent him to pharaoh , with authority manifest .
'exaltations to you ' they will answer . 'you are our guardian other than them ! no , rather they worshipped the jinn , and it was them which most believed '
he said : o my people ! surely i am a plain warner to you :
it is god who created you from dust , then from a sperm , then formed you into pairs . neither does a female conceive nor gives birth without his knowledge ; nor do the old grow older or become younger in years but in accordance with the law . indeed the law of god works inevitably .
say , “ i do not say to you that i possess the treasures of allah , nor do i say that i gain knowledge of the hidden on my own , nor do i say to you that i am an angel ; i only follow what is divinely revealed to me ” ; say , “ will the blind and the sighted ever be equal ? so do you not think ? ”
there would be naught but a single cry , when lo ! they shall all be brought before us ;
and to it he will return you . then , he will bring you forth .
have we not made the earth a resting place ?
and on the day when he will gather themtogether :  o you assembly of jinns ! many did you mislead of men ,  and their auliya'amongst men will say :  our lord ! we benefited one from the other , but now we have reached our appointed term which you did appoint for us .  he will say :  the fire be your dwelling-place , you will dwell therein forever , except as allah may will . certainly your lord is all-wise , all-knowing . 
he has turned with mercy to the three whose case was deferred , when the earth , for all its spaciousness , closed in upon them , and their own souls seemed straitened to them and they realised that there was no refuge from god except in him . he turned to them so that they might turn to him . god is the ever forgiving , the most merciful .
shu'ayb asked them ,  why do you not have fear of god ?
and never did we destroy a township which did not have heralds of warning , –
do not marry any of the women whom your fathers had married , excluding what is already past . that is indeed an indecency , an outrage and an evil course .
on the day when it shall be heated in the fire of hell , then their foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded with it ; this is what you hoarded up for yourselves , therefore taste what you hoarded .
indeed , to us is their return .
lo ! thus do we reward the good .
, by revealing the qur'an to you we narrate to you in the best manner the stories of the past although before this narration you were utterly unaware of them .
and if thou ask themthey will say : we did but talk and jest . say : was it at allah and his revelations and his messenger that ye did scoff ?
and whathave they that allah should not chastise them while they hinderfrom the sacred mosque and they are notguardians of it ; its guardians are only those who guard , but most of them do not know .
did we not destroy the men of old ?
moses said to him :  may i follow thee , on the footing that thou teach me something of thetruth which thou hast been taught ? 
a book whereof the verses are detailed : an arabic qur'an : for a people who know :
they have sold god 's revelations for a paltry price , and barred others from his path . how evil is what they have been doing !
say ,  the truth is from your lord  : let him who will believe , and let him who will , reject : for the wrong-doers we have prepared a fire whose , like the walls and roof of a tent , will hem them in : if they implore relief they will be granted water like melted brass , that will scald their faces , how dreadful the drink ! how uncomfortable a couch to recline on !
but they gave him the lie , and hamstrung the she-camel . so their lord destroyed them for their crime and razed their city to the ground .
allah knows those of you who hinder , and those who say to their brothers : 'come to us ' and they do not come to the battle but a little ,
then will he have no might nor any helper .
and when he showed them to you , when you met , as few in your eyes and he made you to appear little in their eyes , in order that allah might bring about a matter which was to be done , and to allah are all affairs returned .
and david and solomon -- when they gave judgment concerning the tillage , when the sheep of the people strayed there , and we bore witness to their judgment ;
he said ,  my people , is my tribe mightier to you than god ? you put him behind you , turning your backs on him ! surely , my lord encompasses all that you do .
this indeed is an unjust division !
taught him by one terrible in power ,
ask them , which of them will averthat !
certainly we settled the children of israel in a worthy settlement and we provided them with all the good things , and they did not differ untilthe knowledge had come to them . your lord will indeed judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they used to differ .
your ruin has come close , still closer .
so cause a fragment of the sky to fall on us , if you are truthful . 
of a sperm-drop he created him , and determined him ,
he subjugated for you whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth , each and everything . verily there are signs in this for those who reflect .
and if we give man a taste of mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , verily ! he is despairing , ungrateful .
“ there is nothing except our life of this world , we die and we live , and we are not to be raised . ”
lo ! thou art ever seeing us .
 and o my people ! i ask you for no wealth in return : my reward is from none but allah : but i will not drive awaythose who believe : for verily they are to meet their lord , and ye i see are the ignorant ones !
those whom you submit to the fire are certainly disgraced . there is no helper for the unjust .
the appointed time for all of them will be the day of judgment
but if anyone opposes the messenger after his guidance has become clear to him , and follows a path other than that of the faithful , we shall let him pursue his chosen path and shall cast him into hell : an evil destination .
“ or some other creation which you deem great ” ; so they will now say , “ who will create us again ? ” ; proclaim , “ he who created you for the first time ” ; so now they will mockingly shake their heads at you , and question , “ when is this going to occur ? ” ; say , “ it could perhaps be soon . ”
verily in this is a message for any that has a heart and understanding or who gives ear and earnestly witnesses .
they would surely say :  our eyes have beendazzled . nay , we are a people bewitched . 
the proud ones said , “ we deny what you have believed in . ”
so that you may warn a people whose ancestors were not warned before wherefore they are heedless .
if you do not bring him , do not come to us for we shall not give you any more grain . 
it was he who spread out the earth and placed upon it mountains and rivers , and fruits of every kind in male and female pairs . he drew the veil of night over the day . in all this , truly , there are signs for people who reflect .
and it behoves them not , and they have not the power to do .
the pious ones will live amidst gardens and springs ,
and made the day as a means of subsistence ?
then , you are thosekilling one another and evicting a party of your people from their homes , cooperating against them in sin and aggression . and if they come to you as captives , you ransom them , although their eviction was forbidden to you . so do you believe in part of the scripture and disbelieve in part ? then what is the recompense for those who do that among you except disgrace in worldly life ; and on the day of resurrection they will be sent back to the severest of punishment . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
and allah summoneth to the abode of peace , and leadeth whom he will to a straight path .
the pious ones will be triumphant .
their parable is that of one who lighted a torch , and when it had lit up all around him , allah took away their light , and left them sightless in a manifold darkness .
the day when faces will be whitened and faces blackened . to those whose faces have become blackened it will be said : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? then taste the punishment for that you disbelieved '
or do they hold the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the almighty , the great bestower ?
no remembrance from their lord comes to them lately renewed , but they listen to it yet playing ,
surely those who call unto thee from behind the apartments , the most of them do not understand .
and we made a covenant with you : “ you shall not shed the blood of your own , nor shall you evict your own from your homes. ” you agreed , and were all witnesses .
o you who believe ! do not take my enemy and your enemy for friends : would you offer them love while they deny what has come to you of the truth , driving out the apostle and yourselves because you believe in allah , your lord ? if you go forth struggling hard in my path and seeking my pleasure , would you manifest love to them ? and i know what you conceal and what you manifest ; and whoever of you does this , he indeed has gone astray from the straight path .
when he perceived that their hands could not reach it , he mistrusted them , and felt afraid of them . they said : 'do not be afraid . we have been sent to the people of lot .
except iblishe was proud and was one of the disbelievers .
bear patiently with what they say , and remember our worshiper david , a man of might . he was ever turning in repentance .
say ,  shall i take as my protector someone other than god , creator of the heavens and the earth , who feeds all and is fed by none ?  say ,  i have been commanded to be the first of those who submit . do not be one of the polytheists . 
saying : make thou long coats of mail and measure the links . and do ye right . lo ! i am seer of what ye do .
and the earth which opens up ,
we had already shown you favor
do the people who commit evil think that we shall make their life and death like that of the righteously striving believers ? how terrible is their judgment !
our lord , give us what you promised us by your messengers , and do not abase us on the day of resurrection . you do not break your promise '
divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods of purity , and it is not lawful for them to conceal what allah has created in their wombs if they believe in allah and the last day ; and their husbands have a greater right to restore them during this , if they desire reconcilement . the wives have rights similar to the obligations upon them , in accordance with honourable norms ; and men have a degree above them , and allah is all-mighty and all-wise .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth in true : the day he saith ,  be ,  behold ! it is . his word is the truth . his will be the dominion the day the trumpet will be blown . he knoweth the unseen as well as that which is open . for he is the wise , well acquainted .
and those of jewry -- we have forbidden them what we related to thee before , and we wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
mankind were but a singlecommunity ; then they differed . and were it not for a prior decree of your lord , decision would have been made between them concerning that about which they differ .
he will sip it with difficulty but be unable to swallow , and death will approach him from every side and he will not die ; and a severe punishment is after him .
he said , ' o my lord , help me , for that they cry me lies . '
why , whenever they make a promise do some of them cast it aside ! most of them do not believe .
it is guidance and good news for the believers
 by god , we were plainly in error
so that we might make it an instructive event for you , and retentive ears might preserve its memory .
and do not say – the lie which your tongues speak – “ this is lawful , and this is forbidden ” in order to fabricate a lie against allah ; indeed those who fabricate lies against allah will never prosper .
the unbelievers ask : 'why was the koran not sent down to him all at once ' as such we strengthen your heart thereby , and we have recited it very distinctly .
“ our lord , we have believed in what you have revealed , and we have followed the messenger , so count us among the witnesses . ”
but when he tries him and restricts his provision , he says ,  my lord has humiliated me . 
whoever does a good deed will be repaid tenfold , but those who do a bad deed will only be repaid with its equivalent and they shall not be wronged .
so , call youuponallah makingworship pure for him . however much the disbelieversmay hate .
nay , rather we have been robbed ! '
allah has struck an example of a man shared by disagreeing partners , and a man who is owned by just one man , are the two equally alike ? praise belongs toallah , but most of them do not know .
that they may bear their own burdens in full on the day of resurrection and some of the burdens of those whom they misguide without knowledge . unquestionably , evil is that which they bear .
but when it descends in their courtyard it will be a dismal dawn for those who had been warned .
and the dying one is certain that it is theseparation
if they disbelieve you , those before them also disbelieved . their messengers came to them with the clear proofs , with the psalms , and with the enlightening scripture .
and of his signs is this : he showeth you the lightning for a fear and for a hope , and sendeth down water from the sky , and thereby quickeneth the earth after her death . lo ! herein indeed are portents for folk who understand .
on the day when secrets are disclosed ,
so i do call to witness what ye see ,
an arabic quran , without any defect , so they may become righteous .
then we will follow them with the later ones .
and we signalled to moses : ‘ throw down your staff. ’ and behold , it was swallowing what they had faked .
but it is nothing else than a reminder to all the 'alamin .
and , out of kindness , lower to them the wing of humility , and say :  my lord ! bestow on them thy mercy even as they cherished me in childhood . 
what will make you realize what the day of judgement will be ?
and as a summoner unto allah by his permission , and as a lamp that giveth light .
thus they will admit their sin . so away with the inmates of the blaze !
and those who argue concerning god after that answer has been made to him , their argument is null and void in the sight of their lord ; anger shall rest upon them , and there awaits them a terrible chastisement .
hast thou not seen how god has struck a similitude ? a good word is as a good tree -- its roots are firm , and its branches are in heaven ;
but the one that was below her called to her , 'nay , do not sorrow ; see , thy lord has set below thee a rivulet .
then we changed the evil for the good , until they increased in number and in wealth , and said :  our fathers were touched with eviland with good .  so we seized them of a sudden while they were unaware .
they say , ‘ allah has taken a son ! ’ immaculate is he ! he is the all-sufficient . to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . you have no authority for this . do you attribute to allah what you do not know ?
or have ye taken security from him who is in the heaven that he will not let loose on you a hurricane ? but ye shall know the manner of my warning .
and we taught him the making of shields for you , to protect you from your violence . are you , then , appreciative ?
and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah and the meeting with him , it is they who have no hope of my mercy , and it is they who willa painful torment .
in fact , they have denied the hour , and we have prepared for those who deny the hour a blaze .
they also say : 'how is it that this messenger eats food and walks about the markets ? why has no angel been sent down with him to warn us ?
 other gods as partners ! so schemeagainst me , all of you , and give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels , 'bow yourselves to adam ' ; so they bowed themselves , save iblis ; he refused , and waxed proud , and so he became one of the unbelievers .
we did not send any messenger except to be obeyed by god ’ s leave . had they , when they wronged themselves , come to you , and prayed for god 's forgiveness , and the messenger had prayed for their forgiveness , they would have found god relenting and merciful .
he knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal .
say : “ who can protect you from allah if he desires an evil for you ? and who can prevent him if he desires to show mercy to you ? ” they shall find none other than allah to be their protector or helper .
ah ! alas forservants ! there comes not a messenger to them but they mock him !
yet surely your lord , with respect to those who fly after they are persecuted , then they struggle hard and are patient , most surely your lord after that is forgiving , merciful .
are then they secure against the contrivance of allah ? and none feeleth secure against the contrivance of allah except the people who are losers .
yet you deny the last judgement .
allah will surely ascertain who are the believers and who are the hypocrites .
inform them about the matter of abraham 's guests .
and whosoever comes with evil , they will be flung upon their faces into the fire . will you be recompensed for aught other than what you do ?
and of men and addawab , and cattle , in like manner of various colours . it is only those who have knowledge among his slaves that fear allah . verily , allah is allmighty , oftforgiving .
and firon and those before him and the overthrown cities continuously committed sins .
he is not chary of making public what is unknown .
this is the way of thy lord , leading straight : we have detailed the signs for those who receive admonition .
you are liable to imperil your lifethat they will not have faith .
o you who believe ! when death approaches one of you , let two reliable persons from among you act as witnesses to the making of a bequest , or two persons from another people if you are travelling in the land and the event of death approaches you . engage them after the prayer . if you have doubts , let them swear by god : “ we will not sell our testimony for any price , even if he was a near relative , and we will not conceal god ’ s testimony , for then we would be sinners . ”
and he became inside the city fearful and anticipating , when suddenly the one who sought his help the previous day cried out to him . moses said to him ,  indeed , you are an evident , deviator . 
and subsequently the third , the manat ?
and he will provide him fromhe never could imagine . and whosoever puts his trust in allah , then he will suffice him . verily , allah will accomplish his purpose . indeed allah has set a measure for all things .
we wrote for him in the tablets advice concerning all things and an elaboration of all things , , ‘ hold on to them with power , and bid your people to hold on to the best ofthem . soon i shall show you the abode of the transgressors .
say , ‘ allah knows best how long they remained . to him belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . how well does he see ! how well does he hear ! they have no guardian besides him , and none shares with him in his judgement . ’
, we are well aware of what they say ; and you are not required to force things on them . so exhort with the qur'an all those who fear my warning .
they , in fact , stayed in the cave for three hundred plus nine further years .
who is he who will lend god a loan of goodness , that he may double it for him , and will have a generous reward ?
but when they reached the point where the two rivers meet , they forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , as if through a tunnel .
“ i convey to you the messages of my lord and am your trustworthy well-wisher . ”
it is he who sends down upon his servantverses of clear evidence that he may bring you out from darknesses into the light . and indeed , allah is to you kind and merciful .
] said :  by your might , then i will surely mislead them all ,
those who disbelieve say , “ why was a miracle not sent down to him from his lord ? ” you are only a warner , and to every community is a guide .
but they turned away , so we sent against them sail al'arim , and we converted their two gardens into gardens producing bitter bad fruit , and tamarisks , and some few lotetrees .
say :  obey god and obey the apostle . if you turn away , then for him is his duty to fulfil , and for you the burden that you carry ; yet if you obey him you will be rightly guided . the duty of the messenger is to convey the message clearly .
and they indeed sought to shame his guest . so we blinded their eyes ,  then taste you my torment and my warnings . 
then evil was the consequence to those who dealt in evil , because they denied the revelations of allah and made a mock of them .
moses replied ,  no , my lord is with me , and he will guide me . 
though youmay be eager to guide them , god does not guide those whom he lets go astray , . they will have no supporters .
and they will not be permitted to put forth any excuse .
from both of them emerge pearl and coral .
on that day will they follow the caller : no crookednesshim : all sounds shall humble themselves in the presence ofmost gracious : nothing shalt thou hear but the tramp of their feet .
indeed the nearest of all people to abraham are those who follow him and this prophet and those who have faith , and allah is the guardian of the faithful .
that is god 's command , that he has sent down unto you . and whosoever fears god , he will acquit him of his evil deeds , and he will give him a mighty wage .
is he who was dead and we have raised him unto life , and set for him a light wherein he walketh among men , as him whose similitude is in utter darkness whence he can not emerge ? thus is their conduct made fairseeming for the disbelievers .
how many a generation we have destroyed before them , who were superior in furnishings and appearance !
therefore do not listen to the deniers .
those who safeguard their chastity
 those whose lives the angels take while they are doing wrong to themselves .  then , they will makesubmission :  we used not to do any evil .  :  yes ! truly , allah is all-knower of what you used to do .
allah has promised those who have faith and do righteous deeds forgiveness and a great reward .
by the high ceiling ,
so he broke them into pieces , except the chief of them , that haply they may return to it .
therefore he called upon his lord : i am overcome , come thou then to help .
who suggests evil thoughts to the hearts of men --
saying , ‘ it is nothing but traditional sorcery .
that is because they preferred the worldly life over the hereafter and that allah does not guide the disbelieving people .
then we raised them up , that we might test which of the two parties was best at calculating the time period that they had tarried .
and when you and all those with you are seated in the ark , say : 'praise be to allah who has saved us from the harmdoing nation '
and tenderness from us and purity , and he was cautious ;
they went forth early , believing that they had the power .
we have indeed sent down this book to you with the truth , in order to guide mankind ; so whoever attains guidance has attained it is for his own good , and whoever strays , has strayed for his own harm ; and you are not at all responsible for them .
those who disbelieved from among the people of the book and the associaters could not break off , until there had come unto them the evidence .
what is the matter with you then , how do you judge ?
they will recline therein on couches and they will find neither excessive heat nor cold .
and a cup full .
and as for those in whose hearts is a disease , it adds uncleanness to their uncleanness and they die while they are unbelievers .
god has created spouses for you from your own selves . he has created your sons and grandsons from your spouses and has given you pure things for your sustenance . do they then believe in falsehood and reject the bounties of god ?
say to the desert arabs who had stayed behind :  you will be called against a formidable people . you will fight them till they surrender . if you obey , then he will give you a good reward ; but if you turn back , as you had done before , he will punish you with a grievous affliction . 
and indeed there are some guardians over you .
and lower to them the wing of humility out of mercy and say ,  my lord , have mercy upon them as they brought me upsmall . 
or have you received some clear authority ?
verily along with every hardship is ease .
say , “ show me those whom you have matched with him – never ! rather only he is allah , the most honourable , the wise . ”
and we delivered him and his people from the great affliction .
they hide their sins from other people but they can not hide themselves from god who is constantly with them , even when they hold nocturnal meetings , a thing which god does not like . god comprehends all that they do .
but we are a vigilant multitude . ”
i will punish him severely , or cut his throat , unless he bring a valid excuse . 
those who set up another god with god . they will come to know .
it will be those whose effort went astray in the life of the world and who believe nevertheless that they are doing good .
and what is the matter with you that you should not spend in allah ’ s cause , whereas allah is the inheritor of all that is in the heavens and in the earth ? those among you who spent and fought before the conquest of mecca are not equal to others ; they are greater in rank than those who spent and fought after the conquest ; and allah has promised paradise to all of them ; and allah well knows what you do .
he said : o my people ! is my family more esteemed by you than allah ? and you neglect him as a thing cast behind your back ; surely my lord encompasses what you do :
who whispers into the hearts of people ,
who amasses wealth and counts it over .
and he made it a word remaining among his descendants that they might return .
but repentance is notof those whodo evil deeds up until , when death comes to one of them , he says ,  indeed , i have repented now ,  or of those who die while they are disbelievers . for them we have prepared a painful punishment .
said he , 'my people , there is no error in me ; but i am a messenger from the lord of all being . '
verily , we have sent down the book to youin truth : so worship allahby doing religious deeds sincerely for allah 's sake only , .
they did not restrain one another from the wicked things they used to do ; and vile were the things that they were doing !
with their eyes cast down and covered by disgrace ; the day about which they were promised .
verily ! as for those who believe and do righteous deeds , certainly ! we shall not suffer to be lost the reward of anyone who does hisdeeds in the most perfect manner .
their cry therein :  glory to thee , o allah !  and  peace  will be their greeting therein ! and the close of their cry will be :  praise be to allah , the cherisher and sustainer of the worlds ! 
but the evildoers shall live for ever in the punishment of gehenna ,
and when moses came at our appointed time and his lord spoke to him , he said ,  my lord , show yourself to me so that i may look at you .  he replied ,  you can not see me , but look at the mountain ; if it remains firmly in its place , then only will you see me .  and when his lord manifested himself on the mountain , he broke it into pieces and moses fell down unconscious . and when he recovered , he said ,  glory be to you , i turn towards you , and i am the first to believe . 
so we saved him and his household , every one ,
those before them belied , wherefore the torment came on them whence they knew not .
to allah belong the legions of the heavens and the earth . allah is most mighty , most wise .
say thou : bethink ye ! if it is really from allah and then ye disbelieve therein , then who is further astray than one who is in schism far-off ?
thereafter we raised them up that we might know which of the two parties was best at reckoning the time that they had tarried .
they said : put off him and his brother , and send unto the cities callers .
those who conceal allah 's revelations in the book , and purchase for them a miserable profit , - they swallow into themselves naught but fire ; allah will not address them on the day of resurrection . nor purify them : grievous will be their penalty .
when a temptation from the devil provokes you , seek refuge in god ; he is the hearer , the knower .
and we send not the envoys , but good tidings to bear , and warning . yet do the unbelievers dispute with falsehood , that they may rebut thereby the truth . they have taken my signs , and what they are warned of , in mockery .
o you who have faith ! do not follow in satan ’ s steps . whoever follows in satan ’ s stepshe indeed promptsindecent and wrongful acts . were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy upon you , not one of you would ever become pure . but allah purifies whomever he wishes , and allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and we wrote for them in it : a life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , an ear for an ear , a tooth for a tooth , and an equal wound for a wound ; but whoever forgoes it in charity , it will serve as atonement for him . those who do not rule according to what god revealed are the evildoers .
so do not let those who do not believe in it and follow their vain desires , turn you away from it .
but remind , the reminder will benefit the believers .
when the stars shall be thrown down ,
what ! for you the males and for him the females !
did he not find you wandering about and give you guidance ?
indeed i knew that i will encounter my account . ’
so of what benefit will be the comforts that they were using ?
and he made it a word enduring among his seed , that haply they might return .
and : ‘ throw down your staff ! ’ and when he saw it wriggling as if it were a snake , he turned his back , without looking back . ‘ moses ! come forward , and do not be afraid . indeed you are safe . ’
and also corn , withleaves and stalk for fodder , and sweet-scented plants .
he said ,  my lord , then reprieve me until the day they are resurrected . 
he it is who created for you all that is on earth . then he istawatowards the heaven and made them seven heavens and he is the all-knower of everything .
allah has promised you abundant spoils which you shall acquire . he has instantly granted you thisand has restrained the hands of people from you that it may be a sign for the believers and he may guide you to a straight way .
they said : we suffered hurt before thou camest unto us , and since thou hast come unto us . he said : it may be that your lord is going to destroy your adversary and make you viceroys in the earth , that he may see how ye behave .
and why should you not eat of that over which the name of allah has been pronounced when he has already made plain to you what is forbidden , except when you are constrained ? many are those who mislead through ignorance on account of their fancies , but your lord best knows the transgressors .
to excuse some and warn others :
all whatever is in the heavens and in the earth proclaims the purity of allah ; and he only is the most honourable , the wise .
it shall come unto them on a sudden , and they shall not perceive .
they will pass cups of un-intoxicating and unsinful wine to one another .
seest thou not that we have set the evil ones on against the unbelievers , to incite them with fury ?
and by the begetterand that which he begot ;
except the sincere worshipers of allah .
sovereign of humans ,
such people will be rewarded with rejection by god , by the angels , by all mankind .
then they had turned away from himand said :  onetaught , a madman ! 
and what is the matter with you that you should not eat from that over which allah ’ s name has been mentioned whereas he has explained in detail to you all what is forbidden to you except when you are forcedtowards it ? and indeed many lead astray by their own desires , out of ignorance ; indeed your lord well knows the transgressors .
the folk of noah and the factions after them deniedbefore these , and every nation purposed to seize their messenger and argued falsely , thereby to refute the truth . then i seized them , and howwas my punishment .
and we sent lut , when he said unto his people : commit ye an indecency wherewith none hath preceded you in the worlds ?
i shall turn away from my revelations those who magnify themselves wrongfully in the earth , and if they see each token believe it not , and if they see the way of righteousness choose it nor forway , and if they see the way of error choose if forway . that is because they deny our revelations and are used to disregard them .
when he said to his father and his people :  what are these images , to which you are devoted ? 
in fact we brought the truth to them , and indeed they are liars .
he said : my lord ! forgive me , and bestow on me a dominion which no one may obtain beside me : verily thou ! thou art the bestower .
in front of himis hell , and he will be made to drink boiling , festering water .
andwhen we made a covenant with you and caused the mount to tower above you , : hold fast that which we have given you , and remember that which is therein , that ye may ward off .
they can give them no help , nor can they help themselves .
allah sends the winds that stir up clouds and then he spreads them in the sky as he pleases and splits them into different fragments , whereafter you see drops of rain pouring down from them . he then causes the rain to fall on whomsoever of his servants he pleases , and lo , they rejoice at it ,
those who do good works shall have a good reward and more besides . no darkness and no ignominy shall cover their faces . they are destined for paradise wherein they shall dwell forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! seize me not by my beard nor by my head ; surely i was afraid lest you should say : you have caused a division among the children of israel and not waited for my word .
the star of piercing brightness ; -
have you not seen how they wander in every valley ,
no indeed , this is a reminder ;
“ o disbelievers ! do not feign excuses this day ; you will only be repaid what you used to do . ”
 only him who made me , and he will certainly guide me . 
is he who was dead whom we have revived and given a light with which he walks among people to be compared to him who blunders about in darkness from which he will never emerge ? as such what the unbelievers have done appear decorated to them .
are they looking for aught but the hour , that it shall come upon them suddenly ? already its tokens have come ; so , when it has come to them , how shall they have their reminder ?
he it is who appointed the sun a splendour and the moon a light , and measured for her stages , that ye might know the number of the years , and the reckoning . allah created notthat save in truth . he detaileth the revelations for people who have knowledge .
we will facilitate for him the easy end .
o you who have faith ! the witness between you , when death approaches any of you , while making a bequest , shall be two fair men from among yourselves—or two from among others , if you are journeying in the land and the affliction of death visits you . you shall detain the two of them after the prayer , and , if you have any doubt , they shall vow by allah , ‘ we will not sell it for any gain , even if it were a relative , nor will we conceal the testimony of allah , for then we would indeed be among the sinners . ’
they swear by god that they belong with you , but they are not of you they are a people that are afraid .
glorified be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , from that which they ascribe !
then do they not look at the camels - how they are created ?
each prophet asked them : “ will you do so even if we were to show you a way better than the way of your forefathers ? ” they answered : “ we disbelieve in the religion with which you have been sent . ”
'enter you them , in peace and security ! '
go therefore , thou and thy brother ; with my signs , and neglect not to remember me .
o people who believe ! do not make lawful the symbols of allah nor the sacred months nor the sacrificial animals sent to sacred territorynor the animals marked with garlands , nor the lives and wealth of those travelling towards the sacred houseseeking the munificence and pleasure of their lord ; and when you have completed the pilgrimage , you may hunt ; and let not the enmity of the people who had stopped you from going to the sacred mosque tempt you to do injustice ; and help one another in righteousness and piety – and do not help one another in sin and injustice – and keep fearing allah ; indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” , they say , “ the tales of former people . ”
and by the day promised ,
o ye who believe ! retaliation is prescribed for you in the matter of the murdered ; the freeman for the freeman , and the slave for the slave , and the female for the female . and for him who is forgiven somewhat by hisbrother , prosecution according to usage and payment unto him in kindness . this is an alleviation and a mercy from your lord . he who transgresseth after this will have a painful doom .
o prophet ! fear allah , and hearken not to the unbelievers and the hypocrites : verily allah is full of knowledge and wisdom .
who used to say :  are you among those who believe .
that is only satan frightening his partisans ; so do not fear them , but fear me , if you are believers .
indeed those who accepted faith and did good deeds – it is they who are the best among the creation .
whosoever , being a believer , desires the everlasting life and strives for it as he should those their striving will be thanked .
o my people , i fear for you the day of calling out .
my word is not changed ; and never do i inflict the least wrong upon my servants . ”
o ye who believe ! let those whom your right hands possess , and theamong you who have not come of age ask your permission , on three occasions : before morning prayer ; the while ye doff your clothes for the noonday heat ; and after the late-night prayer : these are your three times of undress : outside those times it is not wrong for you or for them to move about attending to each other : thus does allah make clear the signs to you : for allah is full of knowledge and wisdom .
and they brought upon his shirt false blood.said ,  rather , your souls have enticed you to something , so patience is most fitting . and allah is the one sought for help against that which you describe . 
and the horn shall be blown ; that is the day of threat !
“ there is nothing but our first death , and we will not be resurrected .
and mary , the daughter of imran , who guarded her womb , and so we breathed into her of our spirit ; and she believed in the truth of her lord ’ s words and his books , and was one of the devout .
the true god of mankind ,
“ go early to your plantation , if you are going to harvest . ”
he it is who hath appointed for you the night that ye should rest therein and the day giving sight . lo ! herein verily are portents for a folk that heed .
be toiling and worn-out ;
and they marveled that a warner has come to them from among them . the disbelievers said , “ this is a lying magician . ”
you will soon find others who seek security from you as well as from their own people , but when they are invited to return to idol worship , they do so enthusiastically . thus , if they do not keep away from you nor come forward with a peace proposal nor desist from harming you , apprehend and slay them wherever you find them , for we have given you full control over them .
and those who accuse free women then do not bring four witnesses , flog them , eighty stripes , and do not admit any evidence from them ever ; and these it is that are the transgressors ,
all we say is that some of our gods have visited you with some evil. ’ he said , ‘ i call allah to witness—and you too bewitnesses—that i repudiate what you take aspartners
allah will recompense each soul according to its earnings . swift is the reckoning of allah .
he said : even so ; your lord says : it is easy to me : and that we may make him a sign to men and a mercy from us , and it is a matter which has been decreed .
so by your lord , we will question them all
and they will be told ,  this is what you were wont to belie . 
it neither spares , nor releases ,
yet they hamstrung her , and then they became regretful :
you did not expect that the book would be given to you except by the favour of your lord . so do not be the helper of unbelievers ,
and if you fear treachery from any peoplethen publicly throw their covenant at them . allah does not love the treacherous .
they are barred from hearing .
for those who swear off from their wives is a awaiting of four months ; then if they go back , verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
and he shall surely be satisfied .
and give women their dowries as a free gift , but if they of themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion of it , then eat it with enjoyment and with wholesome result .
o people who believe ! when you meet an army , hold firm and remember allah profusely , in order that you succeed .
and recall when we received a pledge from you , and raised the mount above you : “ take what we have given you earnestly , and remember what is in it , that you may attain righteousness . ”
say , ‘ bring your witnesses who may testify that allah has forbidden this. ’ so if they testify , do not testify with them , and do not follow the desires of those who deny our signs , and those who do not believe in the hereafter and equatewith their lord .
to the extent that when the noble messengers lost hope from the visible means , and the people thought that they had spoken wrongly , our help came to them – therefore whoever we willed was saved ; and our punishment is never averted from the guilty .
because of giving alliances to the quraish .
looking to their lord .
if youcovet for their guidance , then verily allah guides not those whom he makes to go astray . and they will have no helpers .
how many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession shall not benefit until allah gives permission to whom he will and is pleased .
verily those who lower their voices in the presence of the apostle of allah -those are they whose hearts allah hath disposed unto piety : theirs will be forgiveness and a mighty hire .
and most surely there are keepers over you
and if he be of the companions of the right hand ,
their wealth and their children will avail them naught against allah . such are rightful owners of the fire ; they will abide therein .
andayub , when he cried to his lord :  verily , distress has seized me , and you are the most merciful of all those who show mercy . 
and tell them that the water is to be divided between them : each one 's right to drink being brought forward .
“ we only feed you for the sake of god . we want from you neither compensation , nor gratitude .
do they own the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them ? let them ascendby the means .
it is allah who gives death * to living beings at the time of their demise , and to those who do not die , during their sleep ; so he restrains the soul on which the decree of death has been passed , and leaves the other till the appointed term ; indeed in this are signs for people who reflect .
such is the seizing of your lord , when he seizes the evildoing villages . his seizing is painful , stern .
and he it is who hath appointed night and day in succession , for him who desireth to remember , or desireth thankfulness .
it is a promise of allah . allah faileth not his promise , but most of mankind know not .
and faces on that day ! upon them shall be gloom .
then we woke them up again so that we might see which of the two groups would better calculate the time they had stayed there .
and your companion is not gone mad .
indeed , those who have believedand thosewho were jews or sabeans or christians - thosewho believed in allah and the last day and did righteousness - no fear will there be concerning them , nor will they grieve .
has he not been informed of what is in the scriptures of moses ,
and they used to say , “ shall we forsake our gods upon the sayings of a mad poet ? ”
he created the heavens and the earth in truth ; high be he exalted above that they associate with him !
and the thunder glorifies him with his praise and the angels do so too in awe of him , and he sends his thunderbolts to strike anyone he pleases , yet they dispute about god , who is inexorable in his power .
except for mercy from thy lord : for his bounty is to theegreat .
say to them ,  it is my lord who increases the provision for such of his servants as he pleases , and decreases it for such of them as he pleases . whatever you spend , he will recompense you for it . he is the best of providers . 
which weighed down your back ?
but whosoever turns away from my remembrance , his shall be a life of narrowness , and on the resurrection day we shall raise him blind . '
‘ this is the hell which the guilty would deny ! ’
and remindfor verily , the reminding profits the believers .
moses came to you with clear signs , yet no sooner was he away from you than you transgressed and took the calf for worship .
and is afraid ,
then whosoever does righteous works , while believing , his striving will not go unappreciated . we record them all for him .
and thou wilt see each nation crouching , each nation summoned to its record . : this day ye are requited what ye used to do .
witnessing what they had done to the believers !
those who do wrong will indeed come to the same end as their fellows . so let them not ask me to hasten .
he said to his slaves , “ place their means back into their sacks , perhaps they may recognise it when they return to their homes , perhaps they may come again . ”
but if your lord had pleased he could have made all human beings into one community of belief . but they would still have differed from one another ,
it is god who created the heavens and the earth and all that lies between them , in six spans , then assumed all authority . you have no protector other than him , nor any intercessor . will you not be warned even then ?
nay , the evil results of their deeds overtook them . and the wrong-doers of this - the evil results of their deeds will soon overtake them , and they will never be able to frustrate !
therein shall be those of refraining looks whom before them hath deflowered neither man nor jinn .
if ye have received a blow , thepeople have received a blow the like thereof . these arethe vicissitudes which we cause to follow one another for mankind , to the end that allah may know those who believe and may choose witnesses from among you ; and allah loveth not wrong-doers .
and if we listed , we could surely take away that which we have revealed unto thee : then thou wilt not find in respect thereof against us as trustee .
who , when they take a measure from people , take in full .
he will say :  alas the woe ! would that i had sent ahead something in my life . 
they were content to stay behind with the womenfolk . their hearts were sealed , leaving them bereft of understanding .
surely we have sent you as a witness and as a bearer of good news and as a warner ,
we sent noah to his nation , saying : 'give warning to your nation before a painful punishment overtakes them '
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a diseasesaid :  allah and his messengerpromised us nothing but delusions ! 
if good befalleth thee , it annoyeth them , and if an affliction befalleth thee , they say ; surely we took good hold of our affair before . and they turn away while they are exulting .
and to allah belong the soldiers of the heavens and the earth . and ever is allah exalted in might and wise .
so when he had furnished them with their supplies , he put thebowl into the bag of his brother . then an announcer called out ,  o caravan , indeed you are thieves . 
those who establish regular prayers and give in regular charity , and also haveassurance of the hereafter .
and the house frequented ,
then he called upon his lord : “ these are a criminal people . ”
until he came to the rising-place of the sun , where he found it rising on a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife , standing by , laughed as we gave her the good news ofisaac , and of jacob , after isaac .
and say , ‘ ‘ immaculate is our lord ! indeed our lord ’ s promise is bound to be fulfilled . ’ ’
they said , 'by god , thou art certainly in thy ancient error .
on couches wrought of gold ,
on that day , we shall roll up the heaven like a written scroll is rolled . as we originated the first creation , so will we bring it back again . this is a binding promise on us which we shall assuredly fulfill .
will surely have paradise for abode .
and though those who do wrong possess all that is in the earth , and therewith as much again , they verily will seek to ransom themselves therewith on the day of resurrection from the awful doom ; and there will appear unto them , from their lord , that wherewith they never reckoned .
remaining in it forever ; their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they get any respite .
does man think that he will be left neglected ?
the way your lord caused you , o dear prophet to come forth from your home with the truth ; and indeed a group of muslims were unhappy about it .
who should then make you deny the judgement after this ?
they shall all appear before god and the weak will say to those who behaved proudly ,  we were your followers . can you protect us from god 's punishment ?  they will reply ,  had god given us guidance , we would have guided you . it is all the same whether we are patient or impatient ; there is no escape for us . 
they said :  o dhu al-qarnayn , gog and magog are spreading corruption in this land . so shall we pay you taxes on the understanding that you will set up a barrier between us and them ? 
allah enjoins you concerning your children : for the male shall be the like of the share of two females , and if there bemore than two females , then for them shall be two-thirds of what he leaves ; but if she be alone , then for her shall be a half ; and for each of his parents a sixth of what he leaves , if he has children ; but if he has no children , and his parents are hisheirs , then it shall be a third for his mother ; but if he has brothers , then a sixth for his mother , afterany bequest he may have made or any debt . your parents and your children—you do not know which of them is likelier to be beneficial for you . this is an ordinance from allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
 is this then a fake , or is it ye that do not see ?
o people who believe ! save yourselves and your families from the fire , the fuel of which is men and stones – appointed over it are the extremely strict angels , who do not refuse the command of allah and carry out whatever they are commanded .
so do not invoke with allah another deity andbe among the punished .
o mankind ! now hath a proof from your lord come unto you , and we have sent down unto you a clear light ;
and allah increases in guidance those who walk aright , and love allah much ] . and the righteous good deeds that last , are better with your lord , for reward and better for resort .
put your trust in the almighty , the most merciful ,
it will be said to him , “ enter it in peace ; this is the day of eternity . ”
those who waityou . then if you gain a victory from allah , they say ,  were we not with you ?  but if the disbelievers have a success , they say ,  did we not gain the advantage over you , but we protected you from the believers ?  allah will judge betweenyou on the day of resurrection , and never will allah give the disbelievers over the believers a way .
the two seas are not alike . the one is sweet , thirst-quenching , and pleasant to drink from , while the other is salty and bitter . yet from each you eat fresh fish and extract ornaments to wear , and in each you see the ships ploughing through the waves so that you may seek his bounty and so that you may feel thankful .
thus do we reward those that do good .
those who wage war against allah and his messenger , and go about the earth spreading mischief -indeed their recompense is that they either be done to death , or be crucified , or have their hands and feet cut off from the opposite sides or be banished from the land . such shall be their degradation in this world ; and a mighty chastisement lies in store for them in the world to come
 far , very far is that which you are promised .
said yusuf , “ it was she who lured me , that i may not guard myself ” – and a witness from her own household testified ; “ if his shirt is torn from the front , then the woman is truthful and he has spoken incorrectly . ”
by the house frequented .
do not be like those who forget about god . he will make them forget themselves . these are the sinful people .
it is he who has dispersed you all around the earth , and it is unto him that you shall all be mustered .
all that . whoever venerates the sanctities of god—it is good for him with his lord . all livestock are permitted to you , except what is recited to you . so stay away from the abomination of idols , and stay away from perjury .
they are like the satan , when he saith unto man : 'disbelieve , ' then , when he disbelieveth , saith : verily i am quit of thee , verily i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
 and we had no authority over you . nay ! but you were transgressing people .
be not deceived by themovement of the disbelievers throughout the land .
they said : if the wolf devoured him while we were a company , we must indeed then be the losers !
they say , ‘ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ’
and remember the woman who maintained her chastity , we therefore breathed our spirit into her and made her and her son a sign for the entire world .
if you do any good openly or in secret , or pardon someone ’ s evil – then indeed allah is oft forgiving , able .
and of the fruits of the palms and the grapes -- you obtain from them intoxication and goodly provision ; most surely there is a sign in this for a people who ponder .
when ye have divorced women , and they have reached their term , then retain them in kindness or release them in kindness . retain them not to their hurt so that ye transgress . he who doeth that hath wronged his soul . make not the revelations of allah a laughing-stock , but remember allah 's grace upon you and that which he hath revealed unto you of the scripture and of wisdom , whereby he doth exhort you . observe your duty to allah and know that allah is aware of all things .
how shall you take it , when each of you has been privily with the other , and they have taken from you a solemn compact ?
and those that bear the burden ,
if any do deeds of righteousness , - be they male or female - and have faith , they will enter heaven , and not the least injustice will be done to them .
and a gulf is set between them and that which they desire , as was done for people of their kind of old . lo ! they were in hopeless doubt .
we shall pull out of every section those who were most perversely rebellious against ar-rahman .
or do they want to stage a deception ? -- then only those who do not believe will be the ones who will be tricked .
let not those who run towards disbelief grieve you ; they shall not hurt allah in the least . allah will not provide for them any share in the next life . a mighty punishment awaits them .
then as for him who gives away and guards ,
serene soul ,
be modest in your bearing , and lower your voice . indeed the ungainliest of voices is the donkey ’ s voice . ’
mary said ,  would that the beneficent god would protect me from you . leave me alone if you are a god fearing person  .
and ere the dawning of each day would seek forgiveness ,
whomever allah guides – only he is on the right path ; and whomever he sends astray – it is they who are the losers .
and unto allahfalls in prostration whoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and so do their shadows in the mornings and in the afternoons .
except for god 's sincere servants .
thinking that some calamity was about to fall on them ;
 and defraud not people by reducing their things , nor do evil , making corruption and mischief in the land .
say :  just think : if your water were to dry up in the morning who will bring you water from a fresh , flowing stream ? 
and lower your wing humbly for them , with mercy , and pray , “ my lord ! have mercy on them both , the way they nursed me when i was young . ”
and if they desire to trick thee , god is sufficient for thee ; he has confirmed thee with his help , and with the believers ,
they demand you to bring upon them torment immediately . had not the time been fixed , the torment would certainly have approached them . it would have come to them suddenly and they would not have even realized how it came .
you will soon recall what i have told you . i entrust god with my affairs . god is well aware of his servants . 
those who listen to the wordand islamic monotheism , etc . ] and follow the best thereofthose arewhom allah has guided and those are men of understanding .
when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease were saying , “ these muslims are proud of their religion ” ; and whoever trusts allah , then indeed allah is almighty , wise .
by the soul and how he formed it ,
we have sent them the truth : but they indeed practise falsehood !
therefore have patience , the promise of allah is true . whether we show you something of that we promise them or call you to us , to us they shall all return .
you are forbidden to marry your mothers , daughters , sisters , paternal aunts , maternal aunts , nieces , your foster-mothers , your foster-sisters , your mothers-in-law , your step-daughters whom you have brought up and with whose mothers you have had carnal relations . it would not be a sin to marry her if you did not have carnal relations with her mother . you are forbidden to marry the wives of your own sons and to marry two sisters at the same time without any adverse affect to the such relations of the past . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he is aware of thestealthy glance , and of all that the hearts conceal .
by the snorting chargers ,
degrees from him and protection and mercy , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and adam and his wife ate of it , and their private parts became apparent to them , and they began to fasten over themselves from the leaves of paradise . and adam disobeyed his lord and erred .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord and give good counsel unto you , and know from allah that which ye know not .
verily those who hide that which we have sent down of evidence and the guidance , after we have expounded its unto mankind in the book , these ! - curseth them allah , and shall curse them the cursers
but those in whose hearts is a disease , - it will add doubt to their doubt , and they will die in a state of unbelief .
god has revealed the best reading material in the form of a book with similar passages which refer to each other and make the skins of those who fear their lord shiver . then their skins and hearts incline to the remembrance of god . this is the guidance of god . he guides whomever he wants . no one can guide those whom god has caused to go astray .
and they say :  none will go to paradise but the jews and the christians ;  but this is only wishful thinking . say :  bring the proof if you are truthful . 
but the most wretched shall flout it ,
again , woe to you , , yes , woe to you !
he only commands you to evil and indecency , and that you should speak against god such things as you know not .
and naught prevents that their expendings should be accepted from them , but that they believe not in god and his messenger , and perform not the prayer save lazily , and that they expend not without they are averse .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have children when he has no wife ? he created all things and he is the all-knower of everything .
those who repent , those who worship allah and praise ; those who journey , those who bow , those who prostrate themselves ; those who order righteousness and forbid evil , and those who observe the limits of allah give glad tidings to the believers .
and the swollen sea ,
alif . lam . ra ' . these are the verses of a book that clearly expounds the truth .
and when they were afflicted with remorse and realized that they had fallen into error , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and does not pardon us , we shall be among the losers . '
blessed is he in whose hand is the sovereignty , and , he is able to do all things .
we then calculated ; so how excellently do we control !
he it is who has sent his messenger with the guidance and the true religion that he may make it prevail over all religions , howsoever those who associate others with allah in his divinity might detest it .
recite ! your lord is the most honorable one ,
when abraham said to his father and his people , ‘ i repudiate what you worship ,
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god with him ; for then each god would have taken off that he created and some of them would have risen up over others ; glory to be god , beyond that they describe ,
a messenger , who recites to you the verses of allahcontaining clear explanations , that he may take out , those who believe and do righteous good deeds from the darknessto the light . and whosoever believes in allah and performs righteous good deeds , he will admit him into gardens under which rivers flow , to dwell therein forever . allah has indeed granted for him an excellent provision .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the sick , nor on yourselves for eating at your homes , or your fathers ’ homes , or your mothers ’ homes , or your brothers ’ homes , or your sisters ’ homes , or the homes of your paternal uncles , or the homes of your paternal aunts , or the homes of your maternal uncles , or the homes of your maternal aunts , or those whose keys you own , or the homes of your friends . you commit no wrong by eating together or separately . but when you enter any home , greet one another with a greeting from god , blessed and good . god thus explains the revelations for you , so that you may understand .
certainly your lord provides with open hands whosoever he will , but according to capacity , for he knows and watches his creatures .
has the tiding of the dispute come to thee ? when they scaled the sanctuary ,
those who disbelieve and bar from the path of allah , and break with the messenger after guidance has been made clear to them shall not hurt allah a thing , and he will annul their deeds .
allah hath given you victory on many fields and on the day of huneyn , when ye exulted in your multitude but it availed you naught , and the earth , vast as it is , was straitened for you ; then ye turned back in flight ;
put your hand into your bosom , and it will come out shining without any blemish ; and draw your hand close to your body to still your fear . those are the two clear signs from your lord for pharaoh and his chiefs , for truly they are a disobedient people . 
the people of lot rejected the messengers , branding them liars .
if thou askest them , 'who sends down out of heaven water , and therewith revives the earth after it is dead ? ' they will say , 'god . ' say : 'praise belongs to god . ' nay , but most of them have no understanding .
and recall that we parted the sea for you , so we saved you , and we drowned the people of pharaoh as you looked on .
may he perish , how he analyzed .
surely it is from sulaiman , and surely it is in the name of allah , the beneficent , the merciful ;
exulting in that which allah hath vouchsafed them of his grace . and they rejoice in those who have not yet joined them from behind them , in the thought that unto them no fear shall come , nor shall they grieve .
they ask thee to hasten on the torment ; and verily the hell is about to encompass the infidels .
but no . he has not fulfilled what was enjoined on him .
'read your book . your self suffices you this day as a reckoner against you '
do they not think that they will be called to account ? -
within which are correct writings .
it is not allowed to you to take women afterwards , nor that you should change them for other wives , though their beauty be pleasing to you , except what your right hand possesses and allah is watchful over all things .
and remember ismail in the book ; he was indeed true to his promise and was a noble messenger , a prophet .
truly ! allah wrongs not mankind in aught ; but mankind wrong themselves .
it isa register inscribed
those are a people who have passed away ; theirs is that which they earned and yours that which ye earn . and ye will not be asked of what they used to do .
then , for such as had transgressed all bounds ,
with clusters of fruit within easy reach .
you will receive other favors which you will love : help from god and an immediate victory , give such glad news to the believers .
and tenderness from us , and innocence . he was devout .
do sons belong to you and daughters to god ?
even if they were to seefrom a distant place , they would only listen to its raging and roaring .
do you not see that allah has created the heavens and the earth with truth ? he can put you away if he will and bring into being a new creation ;
he has given you everything that you asked him for . had you wanted to count the bounties of god , you would not have been able to do it . the human being is unjust and disbelieving .
round them will be passed a cup of pure wine ;
ayn . sin . qaf .
for the people of sheba there was a sign in their homeland : two gardens , one on the right hand and the other on the left . we said to them :  eat what your lord has provided for you , and be grateful . you have a good land and a lord most forgiving . 
but those who disbelieve in our verses , they are the companions of the left ,
when a chapter is revealed enjoining ,  believe in god and strive for the cause of god along with his messenger ,  the wealthy among them ask you to exempt them saying ,  let us stay with those who are to stay behind . 
and we leftfor them among generationsin later times :
this is the revelations from the beneficent , merciful god .
pharaoh replied : 'certainly , and you shall be among those who are near to me . '
'my lord ' he replied , ' i fear they will belie me
how plainly will they see and hear , the day that they will appear before us ! but the unjust today are in error manifest !
and mary , daughter of 'imran , whose body was chaste , therefor we breathed therein something of our spirit . and she put faith in the words of her lord and his scriptures , and was of the obedient .
he wants to expel you from your land through his magic . what is your opinion ? 
have you heard the story of the honorable guests of abraham ?
god has given some of you more provision than others . those who have been given more are unwilling to pass their provision to the servants they possess so that they become their equals . will they then deny the favour of god ?
arisethe night , except for a little -
but he who promotes the truth , and testifies to it—these are the righteous .
so when the messengers came to lot ’ s family ,
they denied those signs out of iniquity and arrogance although their hearts were convinced of their truth . so see how evil was the end of those mischief-makers !
and we send the fertilizing winds and send down water from the sky providing it for you to drink and you are not maintainers of its resources .
then he entered his vine-yard and said , wronging himself :  surely , i do not believe that all this will ever perish .
say : spend willingly or unwillingly , it shall not be accepted from you ; surely you are a transgressing people .
again : may he perish , how he analyzed .
he it is who spread the earth for you ; and made in it paths for you , and sent down water from the sky , and then through it we brought forth many species of diverse plants .
say : every one acts according to his manner ; but your lord best knows who is best guided in the path .
then we gave the book to moosa , to complete the favour on one who is virtuous , and an explanation of all things , a guidance and a mercy , so they may believe in meeting their lord .
and we did certainly give the children of israel the scripture and judgement and prophethood , and we provided them with good things and preferred them over the worlds .
our lord ! verily thou art the assembler of mankind for a day whereof there is no doubt . verily allah faileth not the tryst .
we did not send any messengers for any reason other than to be obeyed because of the will of god . if they ever do injustice to themselves and come to youasking for god 's forgiveness and if the messenger also was to ask god to forgive them , they would certainly find god all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they said : pray for us unto thy lord that he make clear to us of what colour she is.answered : lo ! he saith : verily she is a yellow cow . bright is her colour , gladdening beholders .
for those who attend to their prayers and pay the zakat and who have firm faith in the hereafter :
let them laugh a little , and weep much ; in recompense for what they used to earn .
but if they give you the lie , then say : your lord is the lord of all-encompassing mercy ; and his punishment can not be averted from the guilty people .
it is he who created for you all that is in the earth , then he turned to the heaven and fashioned it into seven heavens , and he has knowledge of all things .
by no means . he will be thrown into the crusher .
shu'aib said to them : 'will you not be cautious ?
when his lord called out to him in the sacred valley of tuwa .
but ye prefer the life of the world
then he turned upon them , striking them with his right hand ,
it is the devil who threatens with his friends ; so do not fear them and fear me , if you have faith .
ask the township where we were , and the caravan with which we travelled hither . lo ! we speak the truth .
and those on the left – howare those on the left !
and do not send away those who call upon their lord morning and afternoon , seeking his countenance . not upon you is anything of their account and not upon them is anything of your account . so were you to send them away , you wouldbe of the wrongdoers .
and obey allah and obey the apostle , and beware ; but if you turn your backs , then know that our apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
those who reject faith and keep offfrom the way of allah , have verily strayed far , far away from the path .
and remember what is recited in your houses of the verses of allah and wisdom . indeed , allah is ever subtle and acquainted .
did we will , we would make it broken orts , and you would remain bitterly jesting --
so also did the people of thamud , lot , and the dwellers of the forest .
after so deciding they said to their father :  why is it that you do not trust us regarding joseph although we are his true well-wishers ? 
who creates and proportions ,
and when we took a covenant from you that , “ do not shed the blood of your own people nor turn out your own people from your colonies ” ; you then acknowledged it and you are witnesses .
the man who believed said further :  o my people ! follow me : i will lead you to the path of right .
and verily , those before them did devise plots , but all planning is allah 's . he knows what every person earns , and the disbelievers will know who gets the good end .
he knows your spoken words and what you hide .
but how can you deny the truth when god 's revelations are being conveyed to you and his own messenger is in your midst ? he who holds fast to god is indeed guided to the straight path .
in their presumptuous insolence the thamud called the truth a lie
indeed they consider it odd that a warner from among themselves should have come to them . so the faithless say , ‘ this is an odd thing . ’
you are not a watcher over them ;
—those whose eyes were blind to my remembrance and who could not hear .
they said ,  father , we went off racing and left joseph with our belongings , and the wolf devoured him . but you will not believe us , even though we are telling the truth . 
god—there is no god except he . he will gather you to the day of resurrection , in which there is no doubt . and who speaks more truly than god ?
and when you call to prayer , they mock and make fun of it ; this is because they are people without any sense .
neither does it intoxicate , nor give a headache .
o prophet ! if faithful women come to you , to take the oath of allegiance to you , that they shall not ascribe any partners to allah , that they shall not steal , nor commit adultery , nor kill their children , nor utter any slander that they may have intentionally fabricated , nor disobey you in what is right , then accept their allegiance , and plead for them to allah for forgiveness . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful
then , we would have made you taste doublelife and doubledeath . then you would not find for yourself against us a helper .
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city , running ; he said : o musa ! the chiefs are taking counsel together concerning thee , that they might slay thee ; wherefore go forth thou , verily i am unto thee of the admonishers .
then they said : ' o moses , will youthrow your rod , or shall we throw ? '
“ therefore bring back our forefathers , if you are truthful ! ”
and in like manner , their associate gods have made killing their children seem fair to many pagans , so that they may ruin them and cause confusion in their religion . had god pleased , they would not have done so ; so leave them to their false inventions .
this is the creation of allah . so show me that which those , besides him have created . nay , the zalimunare in plain error .
and the mounts of those who feared their lord will be led towards paradise , in groups ; to the extent that when they reach it , its gates will be opened and its guards will say to them , “ peace be upon you ! you have done well ! therefore enter paradise , to abide in it forever . ”
and the earth and the mountains are borne away and crushed with a single crushing .
would that you knew what the crash is !
and lo ! there is a party of them who distort the scripture with their tongues , that ye may think that what they say is from the scripture , when it is not from the scripture . and they say : it is from allah , when it is not from allah ; and they speak a lie concerning allah knowingly .
so be not in doubt regarding what these people worship . they worship only as their ancestors worshiped before . we will pay them their due in full , without any reduction .
no vision can grasp him , but his grasp is over all vision . he is the subtle , the expert .
cursed they shalt be , and wheresoever they are come upon they shall be seized and slaughtered all --
also , a tree which grows on the tor of sinai and gives oil and relish for its eaters .
abraham ’ s pleading forgiveness for his father was only to fulfill a promise he had made him . so when it became manifest to him that he was an enemy of god , he repudiated him . indeed abraham was most plaintive and forbearing .
and they say : why does he not bring to us a sign from his lord ? has not there come to them a clear evidence of what is in the previous books ?
and have madea shinning lamp .
and thy lord knoweth what their breasts conceal , and what they publish .
say : this is my way : i call to allah , i and those who follow me being certain , and glory be to allah , and i am not one of the polytheists .
say : 'journey in the land , then behold how was the end of the sinners . '
so be patient . verily , the promise of allah is true , and ask forgiveness for your fault , and glorify the praises of your lord in the ashiand in the ibkar or the 'asr and fajr prayers ] .
the practiceof allah among those who lived aforetime : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
lawful to you is the game of the sea and its food , a provision for you and for the travellers , and the game of the land is forbidden to you so long as you are on pilgrimage , and be careful ofallah , to whom you shall be gathered .
say : the first and the last ,
and do not call upon another god with allah , there is no god except he . all things perish , except his face , judgement is his , and to him all of you shall return .
invoke , “ o allah ! owner of the kingdom – you bestow the kingdom on whomever you will , and you take back the kingdom from whomever you will ; and you give honour to whomever you will , and you humiliate whomever you will ; only in your handlies all goodness ; indeed , you are able to do all things . ”
and when god took compact with the prophets : 'that i have given you of book and wisdom ; then there shall come to you a messenger confirming what is with you -- you shall believe in him and you shall help him ; do you agree ? ' he said . 'and do you take my load on you on that condition ? ' they said , 'we do agree . ' god said , 'bear witness so , and i shall be with you among the witnesses . '
ask pardon for them , or ask not pardon for them ; if thou askest pardon for them seventy times , god will not pardon them ; that , because they disbelieved in god and his messenger ; god guides not the people of the ungodly .
on the day when the secrets are examined
the likeness of a corrupt word is like a corrupt tree uprooted from the earth having no stability .
has not the news reached you of those who disbelieved aforetime ? and so they tasted the evil result of their disbelief , and theirs will be a painful torment .
and they have been persisting in the heinous offence .
those are they upon whom the sentence is justified , among the communities that have passed away before them , of jinn and humans . they are truly losers .
it is those who believe and confound not their belief with wrong doing . these ! theirs is the security and they are the guided .
god would not punish them while you were among them nor while they were asking for forgiveness .
nor that thou shalt thirst therein nor shall suffer from the sun .
and when we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis , who refused .
, tell my servants to say what is best . satan sows dissension among them ; he is the sworn enemy of human beings .
is the one who can create equal to the one who can not create anything ? why , then , will you not consider ?
and say to the unbelievers : 'act you according to your station ; we are acting .
indeed pharaoh tyrannized over the land , reducing its people to factions , abasing one group of them , slaughtering their sons , and sparing their women . indeed , he was one of the agents of corruption .
whenmoses headed towards midian , he said :  i hope my lord will show me the right path . 
that we have created .
allah originates creation , then brings it back again , then to him you shall be returned .
surely , you will find them the greediest for life , of all people even the idolaters . each of them is eager to live a thousand years , though it would not deliver him from the punishment , were he to live . and allah watches what they do .
except the way to hell , as abiders therein for ever , and this unto allah is ever easy .
and meat of birds that they may desire .
however , the deviators from the truth will be the fuel for hell  .
my people , how is it that i call you to salvation while you call me to the fire ;
who in their gardens will be enquiring
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing the wrong path , and wish that you should go astray from the right path ?
is hewho guides you through the darknesses of the land and sea and who sends the winds as good tidings before his mercy ? is there a deity with allah ? high is allah above whatever they associate with him .
or is there for man whatever he wishes ?
whosoever will come with a virtue for him shall be then like thereof , and whosoever will come with a vice shall not be requited save with the like thereof ; and they shall not be wronged .
if you lapse back after the clear verses that have come to you , know that allah is the almighty , the wise .
as if they were hidden pearls .
, whether you ask god to forgive them or not , he will never do so , even if you were to beg seventy times ; they have disbelieved in god and his messenger and god does not guide the evil-doers .
and they shall be presented before their lord in ranks -- 'you have come to us , as we created you upon the first time ; nay , you asserted we should not appoint for you a tryst . '
and that which we have revealed to you of the book , that is the truth verifying that which is before it ; most surely with respect to his servants allah is aware , seeing .
if someone does so through oppression or injustice , we shall cast him into hell : this is howgod works inevitably .
we never sent any messengers before you , but they ate food and walked in the marketplaces . and we made some of you tempters for one another—will you be patient ? your lord is always observing .
each sign we showed them was more marvelous than its counterpart . and we afflicted them with the plagues , so that they may repent .
thus do we explain the signs by various : that they may say ,  thou hast taughtdiligently ,  and that we may make the matter clear to those who know .
it is he who created you from dust , then from a drop offluid , then from a clinging mass , then he brings you forth as infants , thenso that you may come of age , and then that you may become aged—though there are some of you who die earlier—and complete a specified term , and so that you may exercise your reason .
they do not try to speak ahead of him , and they act at his command .
when the sky is rent asunder ,
and verily we sent moses with our revelations and a clear warrant
and if my servants ask you , o prophet . concerning me , tell them that i am quite near to them . i hear and answer the prayer of the suppliant , when he calls to me . so let them respond to my call and believe in me . convey this to them , o prophet ; perhaps they may be guided aright .
for him only are the keys of the heavens and the earth ; he increases the sustenance for whomever he wills and restricts it ; indeed he is the all knowing .
when we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves , except iblis , who said : 'shall i prostrate to him whom you have created from clay ?
this is for the virtuous ; and indeed for the rebellious is a wretched destination .
he is the knower of the unseen and the visible , the almighty , the most merciful ,
among the livestock are some for transportation , and some for clothing . eat of what god has provided for you , and do not follow the footsteps of satan . he is to you an outright enemy .
or do they say : “ he has fabricated it ? ” nay , it is the truth from your lord so that you may warn a people to whom no warner came before you ; perhaps they will be guided to the right way .
likewise , each amount they spend , be it small or large , and each journey they undertake , shall be recorded in their favour so that allah may bestow upon them reward for their good deeds .
then verily they will be roasted into the scorch .
 in gardens and springs .
so why did those whom they had set up as gods apart from allah , hoping that they would bring them nearer to him , not come to their aid ? instead , they failed them . this was the end of the lie they had fabricated and the false beliefs they had invented .
in the midst of these will be maidens , good and comely .
lo ! thisis a conclusive word ,
those who believe and do good works shall have the gardens of paradise for their abode .
said :  then get thee out from here ; for thou art rejected , accursed .
there no sense of fatigue shall touch them , nor shall theybe asked to leave .
and he will teach him the book and the wisdom and the tavrat and the injeel .
'but those who swerve , - they arefuel for hell-fire'-
as such we recompense the gooddoers ,
you can not guide the straying blind ones . you can only make hear those who believe in our revelations submissively .
have fear of god and do not humiliate me  .
had not a grace from his lord reached him , he would indeed have been , so he was cast off on the naked shore , while he was to be blamed .
the offspring of those whom we bore with nuh ; surely he was a grateful servant .
so keep your duty to allah , and obey me .
they shall be made to see each other . the guilty one would fain redeem himself from the chastisement of that day byhis children ,
had it not been for the grace of my lord i too would have been there .
when the unbelievers fostered a sense of honour in their hearts , a sense of pagan honour , god sent down a sense of tranquility on his apostle and the believers , and obliged them to an act of self-restraint , for they were deserving and worthy of it . god is cognisant of everything .
he is allah the creator , the maker , the fashioner ; his are the most excellent names ; whatever is in the heavens and the earth declares his glory ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
but there is nowhere to take refuge :
has the story reached thee , of the forces-
so that god will redeem the sinsin the past orin the future . he will complete his favors to you , guide you to the right path ,
what aileth you that ye hope not toward allah for dignity
 from following me ? didst thou then disobey my order ? 
he who created seven heavens in layers . you see no discrepancy in the creation of the compassionate . look again . can you see any cracks ?
nor is darknesslight ;
and he who shall cause me to die , and then shall quicken me .
in fact , the hearts of the unbelievers are in the dark because of their ignorance of real virtue ; they act against it .
upon all , both theseand thosewe bestow the bounty of your lord : none shall be denied the bounty of your lord --
and when they come to you , they say , “ we are muslims ” whereas they were disbelievers when they came in , and disbelievers when they went out ; and allah knows very well , what they hide .
and lo ! in the source of decrees , which we possess , it is indeed sublime , decisive .
a day whereon men will be like moths scattered about ,
and beware of an affliction that will not smite exclusively those among you who have done wrong . know that god is severe in exacting retribution .
so fight in god 's way , and know that god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
“ except the family of lut ; we shall rescue all of them . ”
wherever you set out from , turn your face in the direction of the sacred mosque -- this is the truth from your lord : he is not unaware of what you do --
praise be to god , who revealed the book to his servant , and allowed in it no distortion .
is hewho begins creation and then repeats it and who provides for you from the heaven and earth ? is there a deity with allah ? say ,  produce your proof , if you should be truthful . 
and they devised a scheme and , without their knowledge , we devised a scheme .
and wealth , wherein they had taken such delight !
on that day the faces of some people will be humbly cast down ,
when there comes to them a matter , be it of security or fear , they broadcast it ; if they had referred it to the messenger and to those in authority among them , those of them whose task it is to investigate would have known the matter . and but for the bounty of god to you , and his mercy , you would surely have followed satan , except a few .
do they not look at the sky above them ? - how we have made it and adorned it , and there are no flaws in it ?
beside allah ? can they be of any help to you , or even be of any help to themselves ? 
he said , “ did we not raise you among us as a child , and you stayed among us for many of your years ?
and this worldly life is not but diversion and amusement . and indeed , the home of the hereafter - that is thelife , if only they knew .
and i will give them respite ; indeed my secret plan is extremely solid .
then pharaoh 's household picked him up -- later to become for them an enemy and a source of grief for them : pharaoh and haman and their hosts were wrongdoers --
then he whose scales weigh heavier
surely we revealed it on the grand night .
we have given examples of every kind to men in this qur'an in various ways , and even then most men disdain everything but unbelief ,
you are forbidden to take as wives your mothers , daughters , sisters , paternal and maternal aunts , your brothers ' daughters and your sisters ' daughters , your foster mothers and foster sisters , your wives ' mothers and stepdaughters in your protection and the daughters of your wives with whom you have consummated your marriage ; but if you have not consummated your marriage then you will not be blamedyou are also forbidden to marry the spouses of your sons or two sisters together , except what has already passed . surely , god is ever-forgiving and merciful .
say : if the beneficent one hath a son , then , i shall be first among the worshippers . .
the ignorant fool among us has spoken outrageously against allah ,
and let not those grieve thee who hasten toward infidelity ; verily they shall not harm allah at all . allah desireth not to provide for them a portion in the hereafter ; and theirs shall be a torment mighty .
on that day of dominion will be that of allah : he will judge between them : so those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in gardens of delight .
then he made him complete and breathed into him of his spirit , and made for you the ears and the eyes and the hearts ; little is it that you give thanks .
and fear the fitnahwhich affects not in particularthose of you who do wrong , and know that allah is severe in punishment .
he knows what penetrates into the earth , and what comes forth from it , what comes down from heaven , and what goes up to it ; he is the all-compassionate , the all-forgiving .
and when abraham was tested by his lord with certain words and he fulfilled them , he said : ' i have appointed you as a leader for the nation'asked : 'and of my descendants ' 'my covenant ' said he , 'the harmdoers shall not receive it '
receive contributions from their wealth , to purify them and sanctify them with it ; and pray for them . your prayer is comfort for them . god is hearing and knowing .
and at dawns they would plead for forgiveness ,
god does not disdain to give a parable about a gnat or a smaller creature . the faithful know that it is the truth from their lord , but those who deny the truth ask ,  what could god mean by this parable ?  he lets many go astray through it , and guides many by it . but he makes only the disobedient go astray :
he said , ‘ indeed i have preferred the love ofniceties to the remembrance of my lord untildisappeared behind theveil . ’
they swear by allah that they did not say it . but they certainly did utter the word of unfaith and renounced faith after their islam . they contemplated what they could not achieve , and they were vindictive only because allah and his apostle had enriched them out of his grace . yet if they repent , it will be better for them ; but if they turn away , allah shall punish them with a painful punishment in this world and the hereafter , and they shall not find on the earth any guardian or helper .
do not drive away those who supplicate their lord morning and evening desiring his face . neither are you accountable for them in any way , nor are they accountable for you in any way , so that you may drive them away and thus become one of the wrongdoers .
if we give man a taste of mercy from ourselves , and then withdraw it from him , behold ! he is in despair andblasphemy .
surely we have revealed the reminder and we will most surely be its guardian .
a remover of exteriors .
o you who have faith ! why do you say what you do not do ?
only those who deny the truth dispute god 's signs . do not let their activity in the land deceive you .
then he was a clinging clot , andcreatedand proportioned
a warning unto him of you who shall go forward or who chooseth to lag behind .
and the cattle ! he hath created them . for you in them there is warmth and other profits and of them ye eat .
the one who denied and turned away .
and those in the fire will say to the keepers of gehenna : 'call your lord to lessen our punishment for one day '
pray to your lord crying humbly , and softly ; indeed he does not love the transgressors .
he who gives me food and drink ;
such was the punishment . and verily the punishment of the hereafter is greater if they did but know .
and when our clear revelations are recited unto them , those who disbelieve say of the truth when it reacheth them : this is mere magic .
freedom fromobligationsfrom allah and his messengerto those of the mushrikun , with whom you made a treaty .
and his family who had stood by him ,
he said :  o my lord ! the prison is more to my liking than that to which they invite me : unless thou turn away their snare from me , i shouldfeel inclined towards them and join the ranks of the ignorant . 
do you not see that god has created the heavens and the earth with ultimate reason ? if he so wills he could take you away from the earth and raise a new creation .
tell my servants that they should always say what is best . satan stirs up discord among them . surely , satan is an outright enemy to man .
:  enter ye here in peace and security . 
allah is the light of the heavens and the earth : the likeness of his light is as a niche wherein is a lamp ; the lamp is in glass ; the glass is as though it were a star brilliant ; lit from a tree blest , an olive , neither in the east nor in the west ; well-nigh its oil would glow forth even though fire touch it not . light upon light . allah guideth unto his light whomsoever he will : and allah propoundeth similitudes for mankind : verily allah is of everything the knower .
speak to him in a soft manner ; maybe he will take admonition or fear . ’
and his people came unto him , running towards him - and before then they used to commit abominations - he said : o my people ! here are my daughters ! they are purer for you . beware of allah , and degrade me not inmy guests . is there not among you any upright man ?
then he will be fully repaid for it ?
in the alternation of the night and the day , the sustenance which god has sent down from the sky to revive the barren earth , and in the changing of the direction of the winds there is evidence of the truth for the people of understanding .
 peace upon noah among the worlds . 
and wherein the sky will be rent apart ? his promise is bound to be fulfilled .
and the herbs and the trees do obe isance . 
then we rescued noah together with the people in the ark and made ita lesson for all people .
he is the lord of heaven and earth and all that is between them , if only you would really believe ,
then didshow him the great sign .
and the people of nuh ! when they belied the apostles we drowned them , and made them a sign unto mankind . and we have gotten ready unto the wrong-doers a torment afflictive ,
and the last shall be better for thee than the first .
‘ eat and pasture your cattle. ’ there are indeed signs in that for those who have sense .
man is never wearied of supplicating for good , and should any ill befall him , he becomes hopeless and despondent .
they wish to put out allah ’ s light with their mouths , whereas allah will perfect his light even if the disbelievers get annoyed .
then their excuse will be but to say :  by god our lord , we were not idolaters . 
say : ' o allah , owner of the kingdom . you give the kingdom to whom you will , and take it away from whom you will , you exalt whom you will and abase whom you will . in your hand is good , you have power over all things .
he said , “ i shall soon seek forgiveness for you from my lord ; indeed he only is the oft forgiving , the most merciful . ”
fear the day when you shall be returned to allah . and every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned ; and they shall not be harmed .
everyone has come , each attended by one who will drive him on , and another who will bear witness .
when i have completed shaping him and have breathed into him of my spirit , then fall you down before him in prostration . 
the evildoers shall have for their portion , a portion like their companions . therefore , they should not ask us to hasten !
it was through god 's mercy that you dealt with them gently ; for had you been stern and hard of heart they would surely have broken away from you . so pardon them and pray that forgiveness be theirs , and seek their counsel in all affairs , and when you have come to a decision place your trust in god alone , for he loves those who place their trust in him .
indeed , your lord knows , , that you standalmost two thirds of the night or half of it or a third of it , anda group of those with you . and allah determinesthe night and the day . he has known that youwill not be able to do it and has turned to you in forgiveness , so recite what is easyof the qur'an . he has known that there will be among you those who are ill and others traveling throughout the land seekingof the bounty of allah and others fighting for the cause of allah . so recite what is easy from it and establish prayer and give zakah and loan allah a goodly loan . and whatever good you put forward for yourselves - you will find it with allah . it is better and greater in reward . and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
their reward with their lord is 'adnparadise , underneath which rivers flow , they will abide therein forever , allah well-pleased with them , and they with him . that is for him who fears his lord .
lo ! this is one of the greatest
save the chosen slaves of allah .
surely with hardship there is ease .
the deniers of the truth say : “ do not give ear to the qur'an and cause interruption when it is recited ; thus perhaps you will gain the upper hand . ”
said ,  get out of paradise , reproached and expelled . whoever follows you among them - i will surely fill hell with you , all together . 
but such as come to him as believers who have worked righteous deeds , - for them are ranks exalted , -
and they will have no protecting friends to help them instead of allah . he whom allah sendeth astray , for him there is no road .
and when it is said unto them : believe as the people believe , they say : shall we believe as the foolish believe ? are not they indeed the foolish ? but they know not .
surely , the religionis for allah only . and those who take auliya'besides him :  we worship them only that they may bring us near to allah .  verily , allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ . truly , allah guides not him who is a liar , and a disbeliever .
to your lord is its finality .
so we gave him the good news of a clement son .
belongs not sincere religion to god ? and those who take protectors , apart from him -- 'we only serve them that they may bring us nigh in nearness to god ' -- surely god shall judge between them touching that whereon they are at variance . surely god guides not him who is a liar , unthankful .
on that day , hell will be brought closer and the human being will come to his senses , but this will be of no avail to him .
say :  o you ignorant people , do you bid me to worship someone other than god ?
say :  allah knows best how long they stayed . with him isthe unseen of the heavens and the earth . how clearly he sees , and hears ! they have no waliother than him , and he makes none to share in his decision and his rule . 
this is a preaching for mankind , and that they may be warned thereby , and that they may know that there is only one god , and that the men of understanding may be admonished .
neither nourishing nor banishing hunger .
we have thus revealed a spirit to youby our command : you knew neither the scripture nor the faith , but we made it a light , guiding with it whoever we will of our servants . you are indeed guiding to the straight path ,
among the people is he whose speech about the worldly life impresses you , and he calls god to witness what is in his heart , while he is the most hostile of adversaries .
and created livelihoods for you in it , and created those for whom you do not provide the sustenance .
by the angels hastening ,
and what aileth us that we should not believe in allah and that which hath come unto us of the truth ; and we long that our lord will enter us with the righteous people .
to the 'ad peoplehud , one of their own brethren . he said :  o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him.ye do nothing but invent !
o believers , follow not the steps of satan ; for whosoever follows the steps of satan , assuredly he bids to indecency and dishonour . but for god 's bounty to you and his mercy not one of you would have been pure ever ; but god purifies whom he will ; and god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
woe to every scandal-monger and slanderer ,
or do you have some clear proof ?
and this is the favor with which you oblige me : you have made the israelites your slaves .
when we substitute one revelation for another , - and allah knows best what he reveals , - they say ,  thou art but a forger  : but most of them understand not .
god created you of dust then of a sperm-drop , then he made you pairs . no female bears or brings forth , save with his knowledge ; and none is given long life who is given long life neither is any diminished in his life , but it is in a book . surely that is easy for god .
most certainly , they will find out .
will you not understand ? what , is he to whom we have promised a fair promise , and he receives it , like him to whom we have given the enjoyment of the present life , then he on the resurrection day shall be of those that are arraigned ?
but his lord chose him and placed him among the righteous .
taught man what he never knew .
indeed an exalted position of nearness awaits him and an excellent resort .
you shall not kill your offspring for fear of want . it is we who provide for them , and for you . indeed , killing them is a great sin .
by men who neither trading nor commerce distracts them from god ’ s remembrance , and from performing the prayers , and from giving alms . they fear a day when hearts and sights are overturned .
a believing man from pharaoh 's family , who had concealed his faith , said , “ are you going to kill a man for saying , ` my lord is god , ’ and he has brought you clear proofs from your lord ? if he is a liar , his lying will rebound upon him ; but if he is truthful , then some of what he promises you will befall you . god does not guide the extravagant imposter .
verily in this is a sign : but most of them do not believe .
they will say , “ we stayed a day or part of a day , so ask those who keep count . ”
do the people of those towns feel secure that our punishment will not come to them at night while they are asleep ?
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth exalts allah , and he is the exalted in might , the wise .
and their boy servants shall go around them , as if they were pearls , safely hidden .
when any affliction befalls man , he cries out to his lord , penitently turning to him . but when his lord bestows his favour upon him , he forgets the affliction regarding which he had cried out and sets up compeers to allah that they may lead others astray from his path . say , : “ enjoy your unbelief for a while . surely you will be among the inmates of the fire . ”
celebrate the praise of your lord , and plead to him for forgiveness . indeed , he is all-clement .
 our lord ! grant us what thou didst promise unto us through thine messengers , and save us from shame on the day of judgment : for thou never breakest thy promise . 
neither those who disbelieve from the people of the scripture nor the polytheists wish that any good should be sent down to you from your lord . but allah selects for his mercy whom he wills , and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
whether youask forgiveness for themor ask not forgiveness for themif you ask seventy times for their forgiveness allah will not forgive them , because they have disbelieved in allah and his messenger . and allah guides not those people who are fasiqun .
then satan said ,  because you have made me go astray , i shall certainly try to seduce people into straying from the right path .
verily they , if they come to know of you , would stone you or make you revert to their faith , and lo ! then ye will never fare well .
but whenever we removed the plague from them , giving them time to make good their promise , they would break their word .
say :  call upon allah , or call upon rahman : by whatever name ye call upon him , : for to him belong the most beautiful names . neither speak thy prayer aloud , nor speak it in a low tone , but seek a middle course between . 
surely allah will make those who believe and do good enter gardens beneath which rivers flow ; and those who disbelieve enjoy themselves and eat as the beasts eat , and the fire is their abode .
and likewise we revealed this- a blessed one . follow it , then , and become god-fearing ; you may be shown mercy .
do not consider those who are slain for the cause of god to be dead . they are alive but you are unaware of them .
: taste your torment . this is what ye sought to hasten .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who rejected our signs . they were indeed a blind people .
as if they had never have lived there . begone , the nation of midian , just as thamood are gone .
'we wish to eat of it ' they said , 'so that we can satisfy our hearts and know that what you said to us is true , and that we become witnesses to it '
and they believed ; so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are the verses of the wise book ,
securethere they will call for every kind of fruit .
will you be left in what is here , secure ,
say , ‘ on the day of judgement theirfaith will not avail the faithless , nor will they be granted any respite . ’
it is set down on honoured pages ,
then she came to her people , carrying him . they said , “ o mary , you have done something terrible .
with a rope of twisted fibre round her neck .
when he fled unto the laden ship ,
lo ! those who love that slander should be spread concerning those who believe , theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the hereafter . allah knoweth . ye know not .
or do they say : “ he is a poet for whom we await an adverse turn of fortune . ”
what ! they dare say that , “ he has fabricated a lie against allah ” ? and if allah wills , he can seal your heart by his mercy and protection * ; and allah wipes out falsehood and proves the truth by his words ; indeed he knows what lies within the hearts . .
they said , 'shuaib , we do not understand much of what thou sayest . truly we see thee weak among us ; but for thy tribe we would have stoned thee ; for thou art not strong against us .
and worship your lord until the last momentthat will most certainly come .
that is the command of allah , which he has sent down to you , and whosoever fears allah and keeps his duty to him , he will remit his sins from him , and will enlarge his reward .
people of the book , now there has come to you our messenger , making things clear to you , upon an interval between the messengers lest you should say , 'there has not come to us any bearer of good tidings , neither any warner . indeed , there has come to you a bearer of good tidings and a warner ; god is powerful over everything .
do not be envious of what we have given to some people as means of enjoyment and worldly delight . such means are a trial for them , but the reward that you will receive from your lord will be far better and everlasting .
o you who have believed , if you fear allah , he will grant you a criterion and will remove from you your misdeeds and forgive you . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
because the blind man came unto him .
“ what ! you worship baaland leave the best creator ? ” –
she said : my lord ! in what wise shall there be unto me a son whereas no human being hath touched me . allah said : even so . allah createth whatsoever he will , when he hath decreed a thing , he only saith to it : be , and it becometh ;
“ proclaim , , “ travel in the land and see what sort of fate befell the guilty . ”
said :  because you have sent me astray , surely i will sit in wait against themon your straight path .
and they haveprofits from them , and they getto drink . will they not then be grateful ?
easy have we made the qur'an to understand : so is there any one who will be warned ?
i have not created mankind and jinn except to worship me .
and we wrote for him on the tablets the lesson to be drawn from all things and the explanation of all things : hold unto these with firmness , and enjoin your people to take the better therein . i shall show you the home of al-fasiqun .
but only disavowed and turned away ;
 and gardens and springs .
nor do i think that there will be a day of judgment . even if i shall be brought before my lord , i certainly deserve to have a better place than this . 
and if they turn away , then surely , allah is all-aware of those who do mischief .
 this is the day of judgement you had called a lie . 
,
they will say :  allah .  say :  will you not then fear allah . 
and among us there are righteous folk and among us there are far from that . we are sects having different rules .
if you obeyed most of those on earth , they would lead you astray from the path of allah . they follow only supposition and they are but conjecturing .
say to them : “ he is merciful , and it is in him that we believe , and it is in him that we put all our trust . soon will you know who is in manifest error . ”
“ he wants to evict you from your land , so what do you recommend ? ”
and bear with patience , - and your patience is only because of the help of allah - and do not grieve over them , nor feel distressed by their evil plans .
in the morning they called to one another ,
i do not say to you that i possess god 's treasures , or that i have knowledge of the unseen , or that i am an angel . nor do i say concerning those upon whom you look with contempt , that god will not bestow any good upon them -- god knows best what is in their hearts . if i did , i would certainly be one of the wrongdoers . 
on high thrones , watching .
surely , in that there is a sign ; yet most of them do not believe .
but they rebelled against the command of their lord . so the thunderbolt overtook them while they looked on :
have we not made the earth an even expanse ?
those who deny god 's signs and kill the prophets unjustly and kill those who enjoin justice , give them warning of a woeful punishment ,
and we kept his praise among the latter generations .
and the mountains crumbled
and admit them into paradise , with which he has acquainted them .
by allah , we indeed sentto the nations before you , but shaitanmade their deeds fair-seeming to them . so heis their walitoday , and theirs will be a painful torment .
peace be upon noah among all people .
and how many a generation have we destroyed before these , who were goodlier in goods and outward appearance ? * chapter : 19
and even so we set up in every town the great ones as its sinners , that they may plot therein . and they plot not but against themselves , and they perceive not .
he ] said :  nay , but your ownselves have beguiled you into something . so patience is most fitting . may be allah will bring themall to me . truly he ! only he is all-knowing , all-wise . 
meditate upon the name of your lord morning and evening ;
i called to them clearly ,
they therefore said , “ shall we believe in two humans like ourselves , whereas their nation is servile to us ? ”
when entering your garden , you should have said ,  this is what god willed ; all power belongs to him . even if you consider me inferior to yourself in wealth and offspring ,
and those who have been bestowed with knowledge and faith will say :  indeed you have stayed according to the decree of allah , until the day of resurrection , so this is the day of resurrection , but you knew not . 
when the prophet confided a matter to one of his wives , but when she divulged itand allah apprised him about it , he acquaintedwith part of the matter and ignored part of it . so when he told her about it , she said , ‘ who informed you about it ? ’ he said , ‘ the all-knowing and the all-aware has informed me . ’
if you wish to replace one wife with another , and you have given one of them a fortune , take nothing back from it . would you take it back fraudulently and sinfully ?
and when our punishment overtook them they had nothing to say except crying out :  we have indeed been sinners . 
but seek the abode of the hereafter in that which allah hath given thee and neglect not thy portion of the world , and be thou kind even as allah hath been kind to thee , and seek not corruption in the earth ; lo ! allah loveth not corrupters ,
so we said :  strike himwith a piece of it .  thus allah brings the dead to life and shows you his ayatso that you may understand .
and afterward he maketh you return thereto , and he will bring you forth again , aforthbringing .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and as for those who believe and do good works , we shall make them enter gardens underneath which rivers flow - to dwell therein for ever ; there for them are pure companions - and we shall make them enter plenteous shade .
except for those who believe and do good deeds . theirs shall be an unending reward .
even if we had sent down angels to them , and the dead had spoken to them , and we had gathered before them all things manifestly , they wouldnot believe unless allah wished . but most of them are ignorant .
originator of the heavens and the earth—how can he have a son when he never had a companion ? he created all things , and he has knowledge of all things .
and from the remote part of the city there came a man running , he said : o my people ! follow the apostles ;
and set forth to them a parable of two men ; for one of them we made two gardens of grape vines , and we surrounded them both with palms , and in the midst of them we made cornfields .
have you considered : if we let them enjoy themselves for some years .
the arabs of the desert are the worst in unbelief and hypocrisy , and most fitted to be in ignorance of the command which allah hath sent down to his messenger : but allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
do not regard with envy the worldly benefits we have given some of them , for with these we seek only to test them . the provision of your lord is better and more lasting .
for the living and the dead ,
yes indeed , when the soul will reach up to the throat .
the day when their guile shall avail them naught , and they shall not be helped .
lo ! for allah is the religion exclusive . and those who take patrons beside him , saying : we worship them not save in order that they may bring us nigh unto god in approach - -verily allah will judge between them concerning that wherein they differ . verily allah guideth not him who is a liar and ingrate .
those who , should we establish them in the land , will keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and enjoin good and forbid evil ; and allah 's is the end of affairs .
you and all those who you were worshipping , other than allah , shall be the fuel of gehenna ; there you shall all go down to it .
priding themselves on earth , and scheming evil . but evil scheming overwhelms none but its authors . do they expect anything but the precedent of the ancients ? you will not find any change in god ’ s practice , and you will not find any substitute to god ’ s practice .
so he was the measure of two bows or closer still .
and those of you who die , leaving wives , let them make testament for their wives , provision for a year without expulsion ; but if they go forth , there is no fault in you what they may do with themselves honourably ; god is all-mighty , all-wise .
this is our free gift , therefore give freely or withhold , without reckoning .
that is because allah causes the night to enter the day and causes the day to enter the night and because allah is hearing and seeing .
reclining on couches ranged . and we shall couple them with maidens wide eyed .
say ,  this is the truth from your lord . let him who will , believe in it , and him who will , deny it .  for the wrongdoers we have prepared a fire which will cover them like a canopy , and if they beg for water , they will be given water as hot as molten lead , which will scald their faces : how dreadful a drink , and how evil a resting place !
indeed your god is surely only one .
blessed is he who appointed houses in the sky and set in it a lamp and a shining moon .
we did not create the heaven and the earth and everything between them in vain . that is the assumption of those who disbelieve—so woe to those who disbelieve because of the fire .
now we have brought them the word ; haply they may remember .
all the angel then prostrated themselves
tell them ,  our lord will gather us together ; then he will judge between us with truth and justice . he is the just decider , the all knowing . 
 who would despair of the mercy of his lord ,  he answered ,  but those who go astray . 
and of his signs is that he sends winds to herald good tidings and that he may give you a taste of his mercy , and that ships may sail at his bidding , and you may seek his bounty and give thanks to him .
no misfortune ever befalls unless it be by allah 's leave . and whosoever has faith in allah , allah directs his heart along the right path . allah has knowledge of everything .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he may forgive or punish whomever he wants . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say ,  whoever is in error - let the most merciful extend for him an extensionuntil , when they see that which they were promised - either punishmentor the hour- they will come to know who is worst in position and weaker in soldiers . 
they said supplicate for us unto thy lord that he make manifest unto us whatever she should be , for verily the cow hath become dubious unto us and verily we , if god will , shall beguided .
affirm ,  if i am in error , i shall carry the burden thereof ; and if i am rightly guided , it is because of what my lord has revealed to me . truly , he is all-hearing and near at hand . 
nay , we gave provision to these and their fathers until life was prolonged to them . do they not then see that we are visiting the land , curtailing it of its sides ? shall they then prevail ?
and when they repented and realised that they had gone astray , they said , “ if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we are ruined . ”
then they sold him for a paltry price , a handful of counted dirhams ; for they set small store by him .
allah will not take you to task for what is unconsidered in your oaths , but he will take you to task for what your hearts have incurred , and allah is all-forgiving , all-forbearing .
those who believe , and then disbelieve , and then believe , and then disbelieve , and then increase in unbelief-god is not likely to forgive them , neither to guide them on any way .
hast thou not observed those vouchsafed a portion of the book called to the book of allah that it may judge between them ? then a party of them turn away and they are backsliders
have they a ladder up to heaven by means of which they can overhear ? then let their listeners bring a clear proof .
say : the holy spirit hath delivered it from thy lord with truth , that it may confirmthose who believe , and as guidance and good tidings for those who have surrendered .
is not allah the best of the judges ?
surely you shall die and theyshall surely die .
they will be the unbelievers , transgressors .
butonly notification from allah , and his messages .  and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger - then indeed , for him is the fire of hell ; they will abide therein forever .
your lord knows you best . he will have mercy on you if he wills and chastise you if he wills . we have not sent you , , as an overseer over them .
then he will be in blissful state
if good befalls you they dislike it ; and were some calamity to befall you , they would say , “ we had resolved our matters in advance ” , and would turn away rejoicing .
we know indeed that verily that which they say grieveth thee , but it is not thee they belie ; it is the signs of allah the wrong- doers gainsay .
certainly , we have done you a favour another time ,
and made the path of guidance easy for him to follow .
they do know the favours of god , and yet they deny them , for most of them are not grateful .
not are they all alike . of the people of the book there are a community steadfast , reciting the revelations of allah in the hours of night while they prostrate themselves .
and there came to them a messenger from among themselves , but they falsely rejected him ; so the wrath seized them even in the midst of their iniquities .
resting on couches , looking around .
indeed an abiding chastisement came upon them in the morning .
say thou : allah sufficeth for witness between me and you : he knoweth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth . and they who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in allah , those : they shall be the losers .
and if we had revealed itunto any of the non-arabs ,
those who disbelieve spend their possessions on turning men away from god . they will go on spending and rue it in the end , and will be subdued . but those who remain disbelievers shall be gathered into hell
and i shall be embarrassed , and my tongue will not speak plainly , therefor send for aaron .
a book whereof the verses are explained in detail ; a quran in arabic for people who know .
when you return they will appeal to you in the name of god to leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are filthy and their dwelling will be hell as a recompense for what they had gained .
amidst the gardens , springs ,
but if they see a sign they turn away , and say :  this is the same old lie continuing , 
the sacred month for the sacred month , and respect in lieu of respect ; harm the one who harms you , to the extent as he did – and keep fearing allah , and know well that allah is with the pious .
read , and your lord is the most generous ,
if they had desired to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it ; but god was averse that they should be aroused , so he made them pause , and it was said to them , 'tarry you with the tarriers . '
we shall mark him upon his nose !
then he made his posterity out of the extract of a liquid disdained .
satan gives them false promises and tempts them to develop longings which can never be realized .
this is but a little enjoyment , then their destination is hell -what an evil resting place !
have you considered the water you drink ?
andthe day when he will say ,  call 'my partners ' whom you claimed ,  and they will invoke them , but they will not respond to them . and we will put between themdestruction .
those who spend their wealth secretly and openly by day and night , will have their reward with their lord , and they have nothing to fear nor grieve .
and verily ! your lord , he is indeed the all-mighty , the most merciful .
but thewill come to them of a sudden , while they perceive it not ;
our lord ! we believe in what you have sent down , and we follow the messenger ] ; so write us down among those who bear witness .
and that you should seek his forgiveness and turn towards him . he will bestow the best things of life on you for a time ordained , and favour those with blessings who are worthy of grace . but if you turn away , i fear the punishment of a terrible day for you .
when moses arrived at the appointed time and his lord spoke to him , he said :  o lord , reveal yourself to me that i may behold you .   you can not behold me ,  he said .  but look at the mountain : if it remains firm in its place you may then behold me .  but when his lord appeared on the mountain in his effulgence , it crumbled to a heap of dust , and moses fell unconscious . when he came to , he said :  all glory to you . i turn to you in repentance , and i am the first to believe . 
those who were proud say unto those who were despised : did we drive you away from the guidance after it had come unto you ? nay , but ye were guilty .
believers , letthose whom you rightfully possess , and those who are under age ask your leave on three occasions when they come in to see you : before the morning prayer , when you have taken off your garments in the heat of noon , and after the evening prayer . these are the three occasions for your privacy . at other times , there is nothing blameworthy if you or they go around visiting one another . thus god makes clear to you his revelations : god is all knowing and wise .
as for those who left their homes for the cause of god and then were slain or died , god will give them a generous provision . surely god is the best of providers .
have we given them a book before this , to which they are holding fast ?
and have placed therein firm and tall mountains and given you to drink of water fresh
and if it was not for the favor of allah upon you , , and his mercy , a group of them would have determined to mislead you . but they do not mislead except themselves , and they will not harm you at all . and allah has revealed to you the book and wisdom and has taught you that which you did not know . and ever has the favor of allah upon you been great .
it is he who looses the winds , bearing good tidings before his mercy , till , when they are charged with heavy clouds , we drive it to a dead land and therewith send down water , and bring forth , therewith all the fruits . even so we shall bring forth the dead ; haply you will remember .
and those who , when great wrong is done to them , defend themselves ,
in the houses which he has enjoined to raise up and to mention his name therein . in them such people glorify him morning and evening
allah tasketh not a soul except according to its capacity . for it shall be the good it earnoth , and against it the evil it earnoth . our lord ! reckon with not if we forget or er . our lord ! ray not on us a burthen like unto that which thou laidest on those before us , our lord ! impose not on us that for which we have not strength . and pardon us ; forgive us ; and have mercy on us ; thou art our patron : so make us triumph over the disbelieving people !
and in the creation of yourselves and what he disperses of moving creatures are signs for people who are certain .
and ease my task for me .
and it is he who sends the winds as heralds of glad tidings , going before his mercy . till when they have carried a heavy-laden cloud , we drive it to a land that is dead , then we cause waterto descend thereon . then we produce every kind of fruit therewith . similarly , we shall raise up the dead , so that you may remember or take heed .
when waves engulf themlike canopies , they call upon allah , consecrating their faith solely to him . but when he delivers them safely to the land , some of them become lukewarm . none denies our signs except the perfidious , the ungrateful .
god said ,  go away ! hell will be your reward and the reward of any of them who follow you -- an ample recompense .
and we delivered them and their people fromgreat calamity ;
surely there came to them narrativesthat should suffice to deter ,
 and every time i have called to them , that thou mightest forgive them , they havethrust their fingers into their ears , covered themselves up with their garments , grown obstinate , and given themselves up to arrogance .
and there is no blame on you respecting that which you speak indirectly in the asking ofwomen in marriage or keepconcealed within your minds ; allah knows that you will mention them , but do not give them a promise in secret unless you speak in a lawful manner , and do not confirm the marriage tie until the writing is fulfilled , and know that allah knows what is in your minds , therefore beware of him , and know that allah is forgiving , forbearing .
the people of the scripture ask of thee that thou shouldst cause anbook to descend upon them from heaven . they asked a greater thing of moses aforetime , for they said : show us allah plainly . the storm of lightning seized them for their wickedness . thenafter that ) they chose the calfafter clear proofshad come unto them . and we forgave them that ! and we bestowed on moses evident authority .
we created them and strengthened their joints ; and whenever we wish , we can change their faces entirely .
said moosa , “ he says , ‘ she is a cow not made to work , neither ploughing the soil nor watering the fields ; flawless and spotless ’ ; they said , “ you have now conveyed the proper fact ” ; so they sacrificed it , but seemed not to be sacrificing it .
he replied ,  moses , i have chosen you of all mankind for my messages and my words . hold fast to what i have given you , and be among the grateful ! 
are you reluctant to offer charity before your conversation ? if you do not do so , and god pardons you , then perform the prayer , and give alms , and obey god and his messenger . god is aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we rescued hud and the muslims who were with him , by our mercy ; and we saved them from a severe punishment .
when our decreewas fulfilled , we mercifully saved hud and his believing followers . we saved them from the intense torment .
“ allah has begotten. ” they are liars !
and we did certainly send moses with our signs and a clear authority
weigh with an even balance
have they not inwardly pondered – that allah has not created the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , except with truth and a fixed term ? and indeed many people deny the meeting with their lord .
those who were despised say unto those who were proud : nay butscheming night and day , when ye commanded us to disbelieve in allah and set up rivals unto him . and they are filled with remorse when they behold the doom ; and we place carcans on the necks of those who disbelieved . are they requited aught save what they used to do ?
surely the vilest of animals , in allah 's sight , are the deaf , the dumb , who do not understand .
and they are followed by a curse in thisand on the day of judgment : and woeful is the gift which shall be given !
those whose souls the angels seize while they are in a state of purity , saying :  peace be upon you . enter paradise as a reward for your deeds . 
who believe in the ghaib and perform as-salat , and spend out of what we have provided for them .
or do they say , 'he has invented it ? ' nay , but they do not believe .
those who do not believe in the hereafter set a bad example , while god sets the highest example . he is the mighty , the wise .
the trumpet willbe sounded , when all that are in the heavens and on earth will swoon , except such as it will please allah . then will a second one be sounded , when , behold , they will be standing and looking on !
and for those who launch a charge against their spouses , and haveno evidence but their own , - their solitary evidenceif they bear witness four timesby allah that they are solemnly telling the truth ;
it swept people away as if they were trunks of uprooted palm trees .
say : 'allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you . he knows and observes his worshipers '
they would still say , “ our eyes are hallucinating ; in fact , we are people bewitched . ”
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said :  o my people ! worship allah ! you have no other ilahbut him . . will you not fear ? 
to firon and his chiefs , but they followed the bidding of firon , and firon 's bidding was not right-directing .
so the evil things which they did coiled around them , and they were encompassed by that they mocked .
and they say : were we to follow the guidance with thee , we shall be snatched away from our land . have we not established for them an inviolable sanctuary whereunto fruits of every sort are brought : a provision from our presence ? but most of them know not .
so we asked him to build the ark under our eyes and guidance , :  when our command is issued and the source of water boils over , put a pair of every species in it , and your family except those for whom our sentence has been passed already ; and do not speak to me for those who are wicked : they will be drowned .
those who remember allah while standing , sitting oron their backs , and reflect in the creation of the heavens and the earth , : 'our lord ! you have not created this in vain . glory to you ! save us , then , from the chastisement of the fire .
and'ad and thamud . it will be clear to you from their habitations , for satan had made their deeds look attractive to them , and turned them away from the path ; and yet they were a people of acumen .
then verily , for us will be their reckoning .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian , but he was one inclining toward truth , a muslim . and he was not of the polytheists .
o people of the scripture ! why confound ye truth with falsehood and knowingly conceal the truth ?
if god had willed to take a son he could have chosen anyone he pleased out of his creation : but glory be to him ! he is god , the one , the omnipotent .
we sent you with the truth ; a bearer of good news , and a warner . there is no community but a warner has passed through it .
o you who believe , let your dependants and those who have not yet reached the age of puberty , ask permissionon three occasions : before the early morning prayer ; when you disrobe for the mid-day siesta ; and after prayer at night . these are the three occasions of dishabille for you . there is no harm if you or they visit one another at other times . god thus explains things to you clearly , for god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and of all things we created two mates ; perhaps you will remember .
we have created them for a genuine purpose , but most people do not know .
the angel said :  thus shall it be . your lord says : 'it is easy for me ; and we shall do so in order to make him a sign for mankind and a mercy from us . this has been decreed . ' 
this is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . so do not take another god apart from god , or you will be cast into hell , reproved , ostracised .
hast thou not seen those who take for friends a folk with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear a false oath knowingly .
be patient ; yet your patience is only by the help of allah . do not grieve for them , nor distress yourself because of their devising .
“ he aided you with cattle and sons . ”
do they not see that we made the night that they may rest therein and the day giving sight ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
god has told youin the book that when you hear people disbelieving and mocking god 's revelations , do not sit with them unless they change the subject . you will become like them . god will gather all the hypocrites and the disbelievers together in hell fire .
they seek to extinguish allah 's lightwith their mouths , but allah shall spread his light in all its fullness , howsoever the unbelievers may abhor this .
and made them a precedent and example for posterity .
when we asked the angels to bow before adam , they all bowed but iblis , who said :  can i bow before him whom you created from clay ? 
as well as all that you can not see :
but as for him who is given his record from behind his back ,
so when they forgot the remindings that had been given to them , we rescued those who forbade evil , but we seized those who did wrong with a severe torment because they used to rebel .
and filling with it your bellies
and do not abuse those whom they call upon besides allah , lest exceeding the limits they should abuse allah out of ignorance . thus have we made fair seeming to every people their deeds ; then to their lord shall be their return , so he will inform them of what they did .
and who chose the life of the world ,
and give up the open and hidden sins ; those who earn sins will soon receive the punishment of their earnings .
on a day whereon they shall be heated in hell-fire , and therewith shall be branded their foreheads and their sides and their backs : this is that which ye treasured up for yourselves , so taste now that which ye have been treasuring up .
allah indeed knows whatever thing they invoke besides him , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
we wronged them not , but they wronged themselves . so their aliha , other than allah , whom they invoked , profited them naught when there came the command of your lord , nor did they add aughtbut destruction .
and there came a caravan , and they sent their waterdrawer . he let down his pail . he said : good luck ! here is a youth . and they hid him as a treasure , and allah was aware of what they did .
that is nothing but a habit of the ancients ,
say :  each oneis waiting , so wait you too , and you shall know who are they that are on the straight and even path , and who are they that have let themselves be guided .
has not news come to you concerning those who preceded you , such as noah 's people , and the 'ad and thamud , as well as those who came after them ? only god knows who they were . the messengers came to them with clear signs , but they put their hands to their mouths saying ,  we deny the message you have been sent with . we have grave doubts about what you are inviting us to do . 
they said :  if thou desist not , o noah ! thou shalt be stoned . 
say :  o men ! i am sent unto you all , as the messenger of allah , to whom belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth : there is no god but he : it is he that giveth both life and death . so believe in allah and his messenger , the unlettered prophet , who believeth in allah and his words : follow him thatye may be guided . 
if the unbelievers should fight you , they would certainly turn their backs ; then would they find neither protector nor helper .
he it is who shows you his signs and sends down for you sustenance from heaven , and none minds but he who turnsagain and again .
whenever our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say ,  bring back to us our forefathers , if what you say be true . 
those who bear the throne and those around it exalt with the praise of their lord and believe in him . they ask forgiveness for the believers : 'our lord , you embrace all things in mercy and knowledge . forgive those who repent and follow your way . shield them against the punishment of hell .
the piercing star !
from a spring named salsabil .
men said to them :  a great army is gathering against you  : and frightened them : but itincreased their faith : they said :  for us allah sufficeth , and he is the best disposer of affairs . 
nay ! he is forward unto our signs ;
and by ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger ; so we seized him with a heavy punishment .
what , did you think that we created you only for sport , and that you would not be returned to us ? '
allah presents an example of those who disbelieved : the wife of noah and the wife of lot . they were under two of our righteous servants but betrayed them , so those prophets did not avail them from allah at all , and it was said ,  enter the fire with those who enter . 
said moosa , “ what ! you speak in this manner regarding the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? and magicians never succeed . ”
so today those who believed are laughing at the disbelievers ,
those who do not believe in allah and the last day - even though they were given the scriptures , and who do not hold as unlawful that which allah and his messenger have declared to be unlawful , and who do not follow the true religion - fight against them until they pay tribute out of their hand and are utterly subdued .
they said :  o our father ! ask for us forgiveness for our sins , for we were truly at fault . 
have they not observed all things that allah hath created , how their shadows incline to the right and to the left , making prostration unto allah , and they are lowly ?
if god had known of any good in them he would have made them hear ; and if he had made them hear , they would have turned away , swerving aside .
no compulsion is there in religion . rectitude has become clear from error . so whosoever disbelieves in idols and believes in god , has laid hold of the most firm handle , unbreaking ; god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
if you are in doubt of what we have sent down to you , ask those who recite the book before you . the truth has come to you from your lord , therefore do not be of the doubters .
and pharaoh said ,  o haman , construct for me a tower that i might reach the ways -
those who believe and do good , a good final state shall be theirs and a goodly return .
we shall then pick out from every group the one who was most arrogant towards the most gracious .
he will let loose the sky upon you in torrents .
'it guides to the right path , and we have believed therein , and we shall never joinanything with our lord .
 and invoke not besides allah , any that will neither profit you , nor hurt you , but ifyou did so , you shall certainly be one of the zalimun . 
it is allah who has created the seven heavens , and of the earth their like , and the command descends between them so that you know allah is powerful over all things , and that allah encompasses everything in knowledge .
do you not see that in every valley they roam
except he who repents and believes and does good works those , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds ; allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
do not swear by god not to do good things , or have piety , or make peace among people . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
we certainly see you turning your face about in the sky . we will surely turn you to a qiblah of your liking : so turn your face towards the holy mosque , and wherever you may be , turn your faces towards it ! indeed those who were given the book surely know that it is the truth from their lord . and allah is not oblivious of what they do .
the byzantines have been defeated
and let not the satan hinder you ; verily he is unto you an enemy manifest .
but those who try to defeat our signs are people of hell .
we assuredly established you in the earth and arranged for your livelihood in it . little do you give thanks .
and we have not sent you except comprehensively to mankind as a bringer of good tidings and a warner . but most of the people do not know .
thus did we show ibrahimthe kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he be one of those who have faith with certainty .
destroyed were the people of the trench .
the thunder sings his praises , and the angels too , for awe of him . he sends thunder-bolts and strikes whosoever he will with them : even then it is god they contend about ! but mighty is he inpower .
that it was he that destroyed ancient aad
have they chosen deities from earth ? can such deities give life to anyone ?
the hypocrites seek to outwit god -- but it is he who outwits them . and when they stand up for prayer , they do so reluctantly and to be seen by others , and they hardly remember god at all .
they say ,  allah has taken a son .  exalted is he ! rather , to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth . all are devoutly obedient to him ,
do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering veil of the wrath of allah , - or of the coming against them of thehour all of a sudden while they perceive not ?
they said , 'alike it is to us , whether thou admonishest , or art not one of the admonishers ;
two groups among you almost lost courage despite having god as their guardian . the believers should always have trust in god .
and said god :  i shall send it down to you ; but if any of you disbelieve after this , i shall inflict such punishment on him as i never shall inflict on any other creature . 
so be patient for the decision of your lord , and do not obey the sinner or the blasphemer among them .
nor any loving friend .
forbidder of good , exceeder of limits , doubter ,
while the sun keeps revolving in its orbit . this is the dispensation of the mighty , all-knowing .
struggle for allah as is due to him . he has chosen you and has not laden a burden upon you in your religion , being the creed of abraham your father . he has named you muslims before and in this so that the messengercan be a witness for you , and in order that you be witnesses against mankind . therefore , establish the prayer and pay the obligatory charity and hold fast to allah . he is your guardian , the excellent guardian , the excellent helper !
and they ill-treated them for no other reason than that they believed in allah , exalted in power , worthy of all praise ! -
they will turn to each other saying ,
the true servants of the gracious one are those who walk upon the earth with humility and when they are addressed by the ignorant ones , their response is ,  peace  ;
the believers , the jews , the christians , and the sabaeans , all those who believe in god and the last day and do good deeds , will be rewarded by their lord ; they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so today we shall deliver thee with thy body , that thou mayest be a sign to those after thee . surely many men are heedless of our signs . '
say : travel in the land and see the nature of the sequel for the guilty !
among mankind is he who disputeth concerning allah without knowledge , and followeth each froward devil ;
and for every nation is aterm . so when their time has come , they will not remain behind an hour , nor will they precede .
and those who are fearful of the punishment of their lord -
begone , begone , with that which ye are promised !
and dense gardens ,
that is because their messengers came to them with clear explanations , but they said , “ are human beings going to guide us ? ” so they disbelieved and turned away . but god is in no need . god is independent and praiseworthy .
he said : allah only will bring it to you if he please , and you will not escape :
those who have gone before you also beliedthen how was my disapproval !
know that god revives the earth after its death . we thus explain the revelations for you , so that you may understand .
and we did certainly give moses the torah and followed up after him with messengers . and we gave jesus , the son of mary , clear proofs and supported him with the pure spirit . but is itthat every time a messenger came to you , , with what your souls did not desire , you were arrogant ? and a partyyou denied and another party you killed .
receiving what their lord will give them because before this they were gooddoers .
as for the good land , it yields its produce by the leave of its lord . but as for the bad , it produces nothing but hardship and misery . thus we explain the revelations in various ways for people who are thankful .
and when they had both submitted and he put him down upon his forehead ,
surety there are countless signs for those who use their common sense ; they can see alternation of the night and day , in the ships that sail the ocean laden with cargoes beneficial to mankind , and in the rain-water which allah sends down from the sky and thereby gives life to the earth after its death and spreads over it all kinds of animate creatures , in the blowing of the winds and in the clouds which obediently wait for orders between the sky and the earth .
and whencesoever thou comest forthturn thy face toward the inviolable place of worship . lo ! it is the truth from thy lord . allah is not unaware of what ye do .
and make your denial of it your vocation ?
o people who believe ! when you wish to humbly consult with the noble messenger , give some charity before you consult ; that is much better and much purer for you ; so if you do not have the means , thenallah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
you who have attained to faith , remember god 's blessings upon you when mighty armies massed against you . we sent a violent wind against them and hosts that you could not see . god sees all that you do .
and verily , the recompense is sure to happen .
and those who believe in the communications of their lord ,
, ask which of them can guarantee that on the day of judgment .
and taught to him
and we shall set balances of justice for the day of judgment ; then no soul shall be wronged at all ; and if it be but the weight of a grain of mustard-seed we shall bring it ; and we suffice as reckoners .
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given ? they believe in baseless superstitions and taghut , and say about the unbelievers that they are better guided than those who believe .
and the fifth the invoking of the curse of allah on him if he be of those who tell a lie .
horses , mules , and donkeys , which you ride and as an adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
it is a scorching fire !
many of the people of the book wish they might turn you back as unbelievers after you have believed , in envy of their souls , after the truth has been clarified to them . so pardon and forgive until allah brings his command . allah is powerful over everything .
and asked his father and his people ,  what is that you worship ?
and gorgeous eyed fair maidens .
because he sees himself free from want .
and the inhabitants of midian , to moses they also belied . i respited the unbelievers , then i seized them , and how was my disapproval !
if you do not go forth , he will punish you sternly and replace you by other people . you will not harm him in the least . god has power over all things .
in a preserved slate .
the worst creatures in god 's eyes are those who are deaf and dumb , and who possess no understanding .
then we brought near the othersparty ] to that place .
allah is he who created you , then provided food for you , then will cause you to die , thenhe will give you life . is there any of yourpartnersthat do anything of that ? glory be to him ! and exalted be he above all thatthey associate .
they said , “ we are a people of might and great courage , but the decision is yours , so consider what you wish to command . ”
youths as fair as hidden pearls will be set apart to wait upon them ; they will be running to and fro to serve them .
and come not nigh to the orphan 's property , except to improve it , until he attain the age of full strength ; give measure and weight withjustice ; - no burden do we place on any soul , but that which it can bear ; - whenever ye speak , speak justly , even if a near relative is concerned ; and fulfil the covenant of allah : thus doth he command you , that ye may remember .
indeed allah will admit those who believed and did good deeds , into gardens beneath which rivers flow ; indeed allah does whatever he wills .
to pharaoh and his elite , but they followed pharaoh ’ s dictates , and pharaoh ’ s dictates were not right-minded .
and thisis a blessed message which we have sent down . then are you with it unacquainted ?
o you who believe ! be not forward in the presence of allah and his apostle , and be careful ofallah ; surely allah is hearing , knowing .
fight against the leaders of the unbelievers if they violate their established peace treaty with you and revile your faith , to force them to stop their aggression against you . you do not have to bind yourselves to such a treaty .
it is he who scattered you in the earth , and to him you shall be mustered .
he has made the night and the day and the sun and the moon subservient to you ; and all the stars are subservient to his command . surely in this there are signs for men of understanding .
and , set thy purpose resolutely for religion , as a man by nature upright , and be not of those who ascribe partners .
and so that allah may provide you a great help .
but allah raised him to himself . allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
and worship him for a watch of the night and glorify him the night long .
there is no blame on the blind , nor on the lame , nor on the sick . allah will admit those who obey allah and his messenger to the gardens beneath which rivers flow and will inflict a grievous chastisement on those who turn away .
we have been providing these men and their fathers with the means of enjoyment for a long time . have they not ever considered that we populated the earth and then caused many of the inhabitants to pass away ? can they have any success ?
and some part of the night awake for it , a largess for thee . it may be that thy lord will raise thee to a praised estate .
indeed , it is we who will inherit the earth and whoever is on it , and to us they will be returned .
and i shall not be a worshipper of that which ye have worshipped ,
if we will , we would make it broken stubble and you would remain wondering ,
what ! have they partners , who have established for them some religion without the permission of allah ? had it not been for the decree of judgment , the matter would have been decided between them . but verily the wrong-doers will have a grievous penalty .
and he speaketh not of his own desire .
o messenger , deliver that which has been sent down to thee from thy lord ; for if thou dost not , thou wilt not have delivered his message . god will protect thee from men . god guides not the people of the unbelievers .
and had preferred the life of this world ,
to the unbelievers the lord will say ,  were not our revelations recited to you and did not you arrogantly reject them ? you were a sinful people  .
exceptas a mercy from your lord . indeed , his favor upon you has ever been great .
or he bestows both males and females , and he leaves barren whom he will : for he is full of knowledge and power .
therefore stand firmas thou art commanded , - thou and those who with thee turn ; and transgress not : for he seeth well all that ye do .
and i am not about to drive away the believers .
so when thou art relieved , still toil
but they ham-strung her : then did they become full of regrets .
had allah not pre-destined a matter then , o muslims , a terrible punishment would have come upon you due to the ransom you took from the disbelievers .
he said , “ just imagine – when we had taken shelter near the rock , so indeed i forgot the fish ; and none but satan caused me to forget to mention it ; and the fish took its way into the sea – its amazing ! ”
she said , “ how can i bear a son ? no man has ever touched me , nor am i of poor conduct ! ”
surely that you are promised is true ,
when it is said to them : 'prostrate yourselves before the merciful ' , they ask : 'and what is the merciful ? shall we prostrate ourselves to whatever you bid us ' and it increases their aversion .
and watch , for they willsee .
have you seen he who disbelieves our verses and yet says : ' i shall surely be given wealth and children '
and they were pursued by a curse in this life , - and on the day of judgment . ah ! behold ! for the 'ad rejected their lord and cherisher ! ah ! behold ! removedwere 'ad the people of hud !
and the believers will say , 'what , are these the ones who swore by god most earnest oaths that they were with you ? their works have failed now they are losers . '
have those who disbelieved not considered that the heavens and the earth were a joined entity , and we separated them and made from water every living thing ? then will they not believe ?
they said , “ we will continue to squat * before it , till moosa returns to us . ”
those who give their wealth by night and day , secretly and openly , they shall have their reward near their lord , and they will have no fear , nor will they grieve .
verily , he thought and plotted ;
but you have turned away from it .
he said , “ lord of the east and the west , and everything between them , if you understand . ”
the soul and how it was integrated
then praise be to allah , lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , the lord of the worlds .
and prefers the life of this world ,
and certainly we tried those before them , so allah will certainly know those who are true and he will certainly know the liars .
and on couches or thrones , raised high .
 my lord ! then , and put me not amongst the people who are the zalimun . 
so be patient ! allah ’ s promise is indeed true . pleadfor forgiveness of your sin , and celebrate the praise of your lord morning and evening .
it is he who gave you life , will cause you to die , and will again give you life : truly man is a most ungrateful creature !
the disbelievers say , “ will we really return to our former state ? ”
verily we have revealed unto thee clear tokens , and only miscreants will disbelieve in them .
they started their journey and some time latter they embarked in a boat in which he made a hole . moses asked him ,  did you make the hole to drown the people on board ? this is certainly very strange  .
and if it were our will , we would haveall , and ] made angels to replace you on the earth . .
he said , ‘ abraham ! are you renouncing my gods ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . get away from me for a long while . ’
there is a stream of running water in it ;
and whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is allah 's and certainly we enjoined those who were given the book before you andyou too that you should be careful ofallah ; and if you disbelieve , then surely whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is allah 's and allah is self-sufficient , praise-worthy .
had he wanted , he could have stopped the wind and let the ships remain motionless on the surface of the sea , in this there is evidencefor all those who are patient and grateful ,
have you not seen what your lord did to the 'ad
certainly we distribute it among them so that they may take admonition . but most people are only intent on ingratitude .
then he followed a way .
and keep them from evil deeds , and whom thou keepest from evil deeds this day , indeed thou hast mercy on him , and that is the mighty achievement .
praise be to god , who created the heavens and the earth , and made the darkness and the light . yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their lord .
said allah , “ theland is therefore forbidden for them for forty years ; they will wander in the earth ; so do not grieve for these disobedient people . ”
by way of reminder ; and we never are unjust .
who of his bounty has made us to dwell in the abode of everlasting life wherein no weariness assails us neither fatigue . '
among the people of moses is a community that guides by truth , and thereby does justice .
and carpets ready spread ,
and the one who worships any other god along with allah – of which he does not have any proof – his account is with his lord ; indeed there is no salvation for the disbelievers .
do you not see how they ramble in every style ?
to-day no soul will be wronged at all ; nor shall ye be requited but for that which ye have been working .
those unto whom we gave the scripture rejoice in that which is revealed unto thee . and of the clans there are who deny some of it . say : i am commanded only that i serve allah and ascribe unto him no partner . unto him i cry , and unto him is my return .
and how many a township we have destroyed , upon them our violence came at night or while they were taking their midday rest .
perish the imposters .
allah will throw back their mockery on them , and give them rope in their trespasses ; so they will wander like blind ones .
o you who have believed , do not make allies of a people with whom allah has become angry . they have despaired ofthe hereafter just as the disbelievers have despaired ofthe inhabitants of the graves .
have you not regarded him who argued with abraham about his lord , because allah had given him kingdom ? when abraham said , ‘ my lord is he who gives life and brings death , ’ he replied , ‘ igive life and bring death. ’ abraham said , ‘ indeed allah brings the sun from the east ; now you bring it from the west. ’ thereat the faithless one was dumbfounded . and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
but the righteous will drink from a cup whose mixture is aroma .
indeed , those who believed and those who were jews or christians or sabeans- thosewho believed in allah and the last day and did righteousness - will have their reward with their lord , and no fear will there be concerning them , nor will they grieve .
so whoever does an atom 's weight of good will see it ,
nor the darkness and the light ,
said ,  go , for whoever of them follows you , indeed hell will be the recompense of you - an ample recompense .
when affliction touches the people , they call on their lord , turning to him in repentance . but then , when he gives them a taste of his mercy , some of them attribute partners to their lord .
among gardens and fountains ,
those who keep up prayer and spendout of what we have given them .
these our people have taken to them other gods , apart from him . ah , if only they would bring some clear authority regarding them ! but who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie ?
they say : 'if we return to the city , the strong will expel the humiliated ' but the might belongs to allah , and his messenger and the believers , but thehypocrites do not know .
as for those who fear their lord , there await high mansions above which are builthigh mansions , beneath which rivers flow , such is the promise ofallah ; allah will not fail his promise .
had your lord willed , he would have made mankind a single nation . but they continue in their differences
surely your lord makes plentiful the means of subsistence for whom he pleases and he straitens ; surely he is ever aware of , seeing , his servants .
and you did not recite before it any scripture , nor did you inscribe one with your right hand . otherwise the falsifiers would have haddoubt .
musa said : assuredly thou knowest that none hath sent down these save the lord of the heavens and the earth as an enlightenment ; and verily imagine thee , fir'awn , doomed .
i have not created the jinns and men but to worship me .
for it is a tree that springs out of the bottom of hellfire :
and say : my lord ! cause me to land at a blessed landing-place , for thou art best of all who bring to land .
they await indeed that the angel should come unto them , or that thy lord should come or that certain of the signs of thy lord should come . on the day whereon certain of the signs of thy lord will come , belief will not profit any person who had not believed theretofore or had not earned any good by his belief . say thou : so wait ye verily we also are waiting .
besides god , and lead them to the path of the fire ;
they wish you would compromise , then , they would compromise .
verily there is a sign in this , but most of them do not believe .
said ,  o john , take the scripture with determination .  and we gave him judgementa boy
then he turned against them secretly , smiting them with the right hand .
shall be gathered together to the appointed time on a known day '
thy peoplehave denied it , though it is the truth . say : i am not put in charge of you .
people , we have created you from a male and a female , and made you into nations and tribes that you might know one another . the noblest of you before allah is the most righteous of you . allah is the knower , the aware .
leave mewith him whom i created alone ,
and they say : glory be to our lord ! most surely the promise of our lord was to be fulfilled .
we have surely sent down clear signs . it is god who guides whom he will to the path that is straight .
certainly he has a comprehensive knowledge of them and he has numbered them anumbering .
and those who yearned for his place only the day before began to say : ah ! that allah amplifies and straitens the means of subsistence for whom he pleases of his servants ; had not allah been gracious to us , he would most surely have abased us ; ah ! that the ungrateful are never successful .
it is he who created everything on the earth for you : then he turned towards heaven and fashioned it into the seven heavens . he has knowledge of all things .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are verses of the scripture . that which is revealed unto thee from thy lord is the truth , but most of mankind believe not .
it is he who sends down the rain after they had lost hope and spreads out his mercy . he is the guardian and the most praiseworthy .
in a lofty paradise ,
said ,  did we not raise you among us as a child , and you remained among us for years of your life ?
do youask them for any paymentwhich they can not afford ?
about the guilty :
it leaves nothing , nor does it spare ;
they ask : 'why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ' say : 'allah is able to send down a sign ' but most of them do not know .
therein will be thrones , raised on high ,
surely your lord is the creator and knows .
those who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly , surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and they shall enter burning fire .
and truly you have come unto us aloneas we created you the first time . you have left behind you all that which we had bestowed on you . we see not with you your intercessors whom you claimed to be partners with allah . now all relations between you and them have been cut off , and all that you used to claim has vanished from you .
and we saved moosa and all those with him .
and the mountains will move away with an awful movement .
renounce outward sins and the inward ones . indeed those who commit sins shall be requited for what they used to commit .
and when the blast shall sound ,
o people , an example is presented , so listen to it . indeed , those you invoke besides allah will never createa fly , even if they gathered together for that purpose . and if the fly should steal away from them athing , they could not recover it from him . weak are the pursuer and pursued .
those to whom we have given the book , read it in the manner it should be read ; it is they who believe in it ; and those who deny it – it is they who are the losers .
except boiling water and benumbing cold :
apart from god ? do they help you or help themselves ? '
and indeed , your lord - he is the exalted in might , the merciful .
and he said to the one whom he knew to be saved :  mention me to your lord .  but shaitanmade him forget to mention it to his lord ] to forget the remembrance of his lordas to ask for his help , instead of others ] . so ] stayed in prison a fewyears .
and let those who do not find the means to marry abstain , until god enriches them from his bounty . if any of your servants wish to be freed , grant them their wish , if you recognize some good in them . and give them of god ’ s wealth which he has given you . and do not compel your girls to prostitution , seeking the materials of this life , if they desire to remain chaste . should anyone compel them—after their compulsion , god is forgiving and merciful .
the creator of the heavens and the earth : he hath made for you mates of yourselves , and of the cattle also mates , whereby he diffuseth you . not like unto him is aught , and he is the hearer , the beholder !
and was at a distance of but two bow-lengths ornearer ;
believers , let your possessions and your offspring not make you negligent of allah 's remembrance . for whoso does that , they will be the losers .
a little enjoyment and they shall have a painful punishment .
god only forbids you to make friends with those who have fought against you on account of your faith and driven you out of your homes or helped others to do so . any of you who turn towards them in friendship will truly be transgressors .
all talk will be sound and upright .
when it is said to them ,  believe in that which allah has sent down ,  they say ,  we believe only in that which has been sent to us  , and reject everything else , though it is the truth and confirms what is with them . well , ask them ,  if you sincerely believed in what was sent down to you , why did you kill the messengers of allah ?
by allah , i will certainly outwit your idols as soon as you have turned your backs and gone '
his is the supremacy in the heavens and the earth ; and he is the all-mighty and all-wise .
and you held no expectations of the book being sent down upon you , except that it is a mercy from your lord – therefore never support the disbelievers . .
and they say :  what is in the bellies of such and such cattleis for our males alone , and forbidden to our females , but if it is born dead , then all have shares therein .  he will punish them for their attribution . verily , he is all-wise , all-knower . .
allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them ; that is the great achievement .
at length , when they came to avalley of ants , one of the ants said :  o ye ants , get into your habitations , lest solomon and his hosts crush youwithout knowing it . 
and there appointed for you livelihood , and for those you provide not for .
those that cry lies to our signs and wax proud against them the gates of heaven shall not be opened to them , nor shall they enter paradise until the camel passes through the eye of the needle . even so we recompense the sinners ;
mention in the book , moses . he was devoted , a messenger , and a prophet .
and we shall purge their breasts of all traces of rancour ; and they shall be seated on couches facing one another as brothers .
the king asked the women ,  what was the truth of the affair in which you tried to seduce joseph ?  the women said ,  god forbid ! we know no evil of him .  the wife of the nobleman said ,  the truth has now come to light . it was i who tried to seduce him ; he is surely an honest man . 
she took him to her people and they said ,  mary , this is indeed an strange thing .
and when good touches him , withholding ,
and those who guard their chastity
and indeed lut is one of the noble messengers .
then turned he to their gods and said : will ye not eat ?
beware of the fire , which has been prepared for the faithless ,
when that which covers covered the lote-tree ;
enter therein in peace , secure .
but all it will take is a single blast ,
'we do not descend except at the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that lies between . your lord does not forget .
then i swear by the setting of the stars ,
nothing is equal to him . thus are the commandments which i have received and he is the first muslim . 
o you who have believed , seek help through patience and prayer . indeed , allah is with the patient .
and we made firm their hearts when they stood forth and said : our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth . we cry unto no allah beside him , for then should we utter an enormity .
he said :  there are my daughters , if ye must act . 
indeed , we have sent to you a messenger as a witness upon you just as we sent to pharaoh a messenger .
o mankind ! do your duty to your lord , and feara day when no father can avail aught for his son , nor a son avail aught for his father . verily , the promise of allah is true : let not then this present life deceive you , nor let the chief deceiver deceive you about allah .
the fornicatress and the fornicator -- scourge each one of them a hundred stripes , and in the matter of god 's religion let no tenderness for them seize you if you believe in god and the last day ; and let a party of the believers witness their chastisement .
and to recite the koran . whosoever is guided is only guided for himself , and to whosoever goes astray , say : ' i am only a warner '
to god belongs everything in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he wills , and he punishes whom he wills . god is most forgiving , most merciful .
o prophet ! exhort the believers to fight . if there be of you twenty steadfast they shall overcome two hundred , and if there be of you a hundredthey shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve , because theyare a folk without intelligence .
and cut-off his main artery .
we sent moses with our signs and with clear authority
and fir'aun , and those before him , and the cities overthrown ] committed sin ,
say thou : o people of the book ! wherefore disbelieve ye in the revelations of allah , whereas allah is witness of that which ye work !
and a man came from the uttermost part of the city , running . he said : o moses ! lo ! the chiefs take counsel against thee to slay thee ; therefor escape . lo ! i am of those who give thee good advice .
and he raised his parents high on the throne , and they fell down in prostration , before him . he said :  o my father ! this is the fulfilment of my vision of old ! allah hath made it come true ! he was indeed good to me when he took me out of prison and brought youout of the desert , after satan had sown enmity between me and my brothers . verily my lord understandeth best the mysteries of all that he planneth to do , for verily he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
and be not like unto her who unravelleth the thread , after she hath made it strong , to thin filaments , making your oaths a deceit between you because of a nation being more numerous thannation . allah only trieth you thereby , and he verily will explain to you on the day of resurrection that wherein ye differed .
the all-beneficent , the lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them . they will not be able to address him
are these they of whom ye swore that allah would not show them mercy ? : enter the garden . no fear shall come upon you nor is it ye who will grieve .
therefore advise , if advising is beneficial .
and recall what time musa said unto his people : o my people ! remember the favour of allah on you when he made amongst you prophets and made princes , and vouchsafed unto you that which he vouchsafed not to anyone in the world .
god loves those who fight for his cause in battlefield formations firm as an unbreakable concrete wall .
whose hearts are filled with awe at the mention of god ; who endure adversity with fortitude , say their prayers regularly and spend out of what we have given them .
if any of them says , ' i am a god apart from him ' , such a one we recompense with gehenna ; even so we recompense the evildoers .
undoubtedly allah knoweth that which they keep secret and that which they publish ; verily he loveth not the stiff- necked .
'by god , ' they said , 'god has indeed preferred thee above us , and certainly we have been sinful . '
your women are cultivation for you ; so approach your cultivation whenever you like , and send ahead for yourselves . and fear god , and know that you will meet him . and give good news to the believers .
falsehood does not come to it from before it or from behind it . it is a sending down from the one , the wise , the praised .
say : surely my lord amplifies the means of subsistence for whom he pleases of his servants and straitensfor whom , and whatever thing you spend , he exceeds it in reward , and he is the best of sustainers .
they said , ‘ burn him , and help your gods , if you are to do anything ! ’
such shall be the dwellers of paradise , abiding therein , a reward for what they used to do .
therefore remember me , i will remember you , and be thankful to me , and do not be ungrateful to me .
tell them , :  everyone is waiting for his end . wait , then , and you will soon know who are the people of the right way , and are rightly-guided . 
and from the pharaoh . he was the chief of the transgressors .
about what ! you are one to remind of it .
nothing is said to thee that was not said to the messengers before thee : that thy lord has at his commandforgiveness as well as a most grievous penalty .
and the beggar and the outcast had a share in their wealth .
verily ye are in a divided opinion .
they are content to be with thosewho sit behind . their hearts are sealed up , so they understand not .
“ will you be left peacefully in these favours over here ? ”
say thou : this only hath been revealed unto me , that your god is only one god . submit ye then ? !
but the messenger of god and the believers with him fought for the cause of god with their possessions and in person and their reward will be all good things and everlasting happiness .
he said : 'let her throne be disguised , so that we can see whether she is guided or if she is among those who are not guided '
and find you in want and make you to be free from want ?
lo ! we have given theea signal victory ,
such are those who have taken misguidance in exchange for guidance ; but their bargain does not profit them , nor have they found true guidance .
in the end we fulfilled to them our promise , and we saved them and those whom we pleased , but we destroyed those who transgressed beyond bounds .
behold ! the angels said :  o mary ! allah giveth thee glad tidings of a word from him : his name will be christ jesus , the son of mary , held in honour in this world and the hereafter and ofthose nearest to allah ;
thatis surely one of the greater ,
surely these men love the hasty world , and leave be behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied about allahtheir faces blackened . is there not in hell a residence for the arrogant ?
if they repent , perform their prayers , pay religious tax , they would be your brothers in the religion . we explain our revelations to people of knowledge .
those who are concerned about the fate of their own helpless children if they should die and leave them behind should show the same concern for orphans . let them fear god and uphold justice .
and amongst them will be passed round vessels of silver and cups of crystal ,
then moses threw his staff and lo ! it swallowed that which they did falsely show .
then if he divorces her the third time , she will not be lawful to him until she has stayed with another husband ; then if the other husband divorces her , it is no sin for these two to reunite if they consider that they can keep the limits of allah established ; these are the limits set by allah which he explains for people of intellect .
o you who believe ! when believing women come to you as emigrants , examine them , allah knows best as to their faith , then if you ascertain that they are true believers , send them not back to the disbelievers , they are not lawfulfor the disbelievers nor are the disbelievers lawfulfor them . but give the disbelievers thatwhich they have spentto them . and there will be no sin on you to marry them if you have paid their mahr to them . likewise hold not the disbelieving women as wives , and ask forthat which you have spentand let themask back for that which they have spent . that is the judgement of allah . he judges between you . and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
creator of the heavens and the earth , he has made spouses for you from among yourselves , as well as pairs of livestock by means of which he multiplies his creatures . nothing can be compared with him ! he is the all hearing , the all seeing .
: iam commanded only to serve the lord of this land which he hath hallowed , and unto whom all things belong . and i am commanded to be of those who surrender ,
or do they reckon , those who do evil deeds , that they will outstrip us ? ill they judge !
it is not poet 's speech - little is it that ye believe !
and tell the believing women to lower their gaze , and protect their private partsand not to show off their adornment except only that which is apparent , and to draw their veils all over juyubihinnaand not to reveal their adornment except to their husbands , their fathers , their husband 's fathers , their sons , their husband 's sons , their brothers or their brother 's sons , or their sister 's sons , or theirwomen , or theslaves whom their right hands possess , or old male servants who lack vigour , or small children who have no sense of the shame of sex . and let them not stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment . and all of you beg allah to forgive you all , o believers , that you may be successful .
then brought him down to the lowest of the low ,
nay ! you prefer the life of this world ,
god is not ashamed to strike a similitude even of a gnat , or aught above it . as for the believers , they know it is the truth from their lord ; but as for unbelievers , they say , 'what did god desire by this for a similitude ? ' thereby he leads many astray , and thereby he guides many ; and thereby he leads none astray save the ungodly
therefore proclaim the purity of your lord with praise , and be of those who prostrate .
we have written in the psalms , after the reminder , that the earth will be inherited by my righteous servants .
when you will set out to capture booty , those who stayed behindwill say , : ‘ let us follow you. ’ they desire to change the word of allah . say , ‘ you will never follow us ! allah has said thus beforehand. ’ then they will say , ‘ you are envious of us. ’ indeed , they do not understand but a little .
this is the creation of allah . now show me that which thosebeside him have created . nay , but the wrong-doers are in error manifest !
and we did not send any noble messenger before you , but we divinely revealed to him that , “ there is no god except i , therefore worship me alone . ”
attend to your prayers , give the zakatand bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who cultivate it , or is it we who develop it ?
so our lord 's word is realised against us ; we are tasting it .
for the poor who fled their homes and their possessions , seeking grace of allah andpleasure , and assisting allah and his apostle : these it is that are the truthful .
and the poets -- the perverse follow them ;
so gather your guile ; then come in battle-line . whoever today gains the upper hand shall surely prosper .
and string him to a chain seventy cubits long .
moses said ,  that is agreed between me and you ; whichever of the two terms i fulfil , there will be no blame on me . god is witness to what we say . 
and the folk of noah aforetime , lo ! they were more unjust and more rebellious ;
of the people of moses there is a nation who guide by the truth , and by it act with justice .
beholdest not man that we have created him from a sperm ? yet lo ! he is a manifest disputer ?
and assuredly afore them we proved fir'awn 's people , and there came unto them an apostle honoured .
“ move towards the shadow of the smoke having three branches . ”
would that you knew what the clatterer is !
do they not see that god expands the provision for whomever he wills , or restricts it ? surely in this are signs for people who believe .
we indulged and persisted in useless disputes ,
 eat and drink with happiness because of what you used to do . 
then we raised you up after your death so that you might give thanks .
and when we inclined toward theecertain of the jinn , who wished to hear the qur'an and , when they were in its presence , said : give ear ! and , when it was finished , turned back to their people , warning .
and we sent not against his people after him a host from heaven , nor have we been sending down any such .
for the day of decision .
those who believeand in messenger muhammad saw , and do not apostate because of the harm they receive from the polytheists ] , and do righteous good deeds , surely , we shall remit from them their evil deeds and shall reward them according to the best of that which they used to do .
the prayer of abraham for the forgiveness of his father was only because of a promise he had promised him , but when it had become clear unto him that hewas an enemy to allah hedisowned him . lo ! abraham was soft of heart , long-suffering .
and assuredly we sent nuh unto his people saying : verily i am unto you a plain warner .
yes indeed ; do not listen to him – and prostrate , and become close to us .
faces shall be humbled before- the living , the self-subsisting , eternal : hopeless indeed will be the man that carries iniquity .
throw that which is in your right hand . it will swallow up that which they have made , for that which they made is but the guile of a sorcerer . wherever he goes the sorcerer does not prosper '
do they wait for any thing but the hour , that it may come upon them suddenly ? its signs have already appeared . how then will they be warned when it has come upon them ?
verily , the day of judgementis the time appointed for all of them ,
i am only a prophet .
which he made to prevail against them for seven nights and eight days unremittingly , so that you might have seen the people therein prostrate as if they were the trunks of hollow palms .
which none toucheth save the purified ,
but then , if it is afterwards ascertained that both of them meritsin , let two others take their place of those nearly concerned , and let them swear by allah , : verily our testimony is truer than their testimony and we have not transgressed , for them indeed we should be of the evil-doers .
he is allah , there is no god except him . all praise belongs to him in this world and the hereafter . all judgement belongs to him , and to him you will be brought back .
we forewarned the children of israel in the scripture ,  twice you shall commit evil in the land . you shall become great transgressors . 
for each we struck similitudes , and each we ruined utterly .
if thou fearest treachery from any group , throw backto them , on equal terms : for allah loveth not the treacherous .
a befitting recompense for their deeds .
they have taken their oaths as a shield by means of which they hinder people from the way of allah . theirs shall be a humiliating chastisement .
both replied : 'lord , we have harmed ourselves . if you do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall surely be among the lost '
no affliction falls except by the permission of allah . for those who believe in allah , allah will guide his heart . allah has knowledge of all things .
o children of israel , remember my blessing which i bestowed upon you , and that i gave you an advantage over all the nations .
and the rain-spreading winds ,
and they will say ,  may we be reprieved ? 
then we afflicted them with storms , and locusts , and lice , and frogs , and blood : so many clear signs . but they were steeped in arrogance , for they were a people given to sin .
most certainly we will try you until we have discovered those among you who strive their hardest , and those who are steadfast , and will test your record .
and whoever submits himself wholly to allah and he is the doer of good , he indeed has taken hold of the firmest thing upon which one can lay hold ; and allah 's is the end of affairs .
tell my servants to speak in a manner which is the best . indeed satan incites ill feeling between them , and satan is indeed man ’ s manifest enemy .
by the swimmersswimming gently
and whomsoever allah guides , he is the follower of the right way , and whomsoever he causes to err , you shall not find for him guardians besides him ; and we will gather them together on the day of resurrection on their faces , blind and dumb and deaf ; their abode is hell ; whenever it becomes allayed we will add to their burning .
surely we have shown him the way : he may be thankful or unthankful .
so we sent against them a furious wind through days of disaster , that we might give them a taste of a penalty of humiliation in this life ; but the penalty of a hereafter will be more humiliating still : and they will find no help .
and so the sorcerers came to fir'aun . they said :  indeed there will be areward for us if we are the victors . 
just see what strange arguments they bring forward with regard to you ! they have gone so far astray that they can not charge any thing against you .
for god 's are the armies of the heavens and the earth ; and god is all-knowing and all-wise .
he said ,  how can you worship what you yourselves have carved
relate the news of abraham to them .
and allah created you of dust , then of a seed ; then he made you pairs . no female beareth or bringeth forth but with his knowledge . and no aged man growth old , nor is aught diminished of his life , but it is in a book ; verily for allah that is easy .
it is god who made the night for you , that you may rest therein ; and the day allowing sight . god is gracious towards the people , but most people do not give thanks .
and that he it is who is the lord of sirius ;
thereupon the earthquake seized them , and they lay lifeless prostrate in their homes .
forsake the revealed and hidden sin . those who earn sin shall be recompensed for what they have committed .
but , when mortal sight is confounded ,
surely you have made a monstrous statement .
say thou : who hath forbidden the adornment which allah hath produced for his servants and the clean things of food ? say thou : these on the day of judgement , shall be for those alone who in the life of this world have believed . thus we expound the signs unto a people who know .
so carrying him in her arms , she brought him to her people ; they said , “ o maryam , you have indeed committed a great evil ! ”
who created the heavens and the earth and sends down water for you from the sky , by which we make luxuriant gardens grow , you could never make such trees grow in them , is it another deity besides god ? no indeed , but they are a people who equate others with him .
and they say what they do not do ,
messengers indeed have been denied before thee , and they were patient under the denial and the persecution till our succour reached them . there is none to alter the decisions of allah . already there hath reached theeof the tidings of the messengers .
indeed , those who conceal what we sent down of clear proofs and guidance after we made it clear for the people in the scripture - those are cursed by allah and cursed by those who curse ,
ask them , is their creation more prodigious orthat we have created ? indeed , we created them from a viscous clay .
he shattered them all , except the biggest among them , that perhaps they may question it .
lo ! he it is who produceth , then reproduceth ,
that is because they followed that which angered allah and detested his good-will ; so he made their works of non-effect .
they ask theeof the spoils of war . say : the spoils of war belong to allah and the messenger , so keep your duty to allah , and adjust the matter of your difference , and obey allah and his messenger , if ye arebelievers .
allah will assuredly cause those who believe and act righteously to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow . for , most certainly , allah does whatever he pleases .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of pure drink ;
he said , ‘ indeed you can not have patience with me !
and they proffer unto allah submission on that day , and all that they used to invent hath failed them .
and there are those who have taken a mosque to cause harm , disbelief , and to divide the believers , and as a place of ambush for those who fought allah and his messenger before . they swear : 'we desired nothing but good ' , but allah bears witness that they are liars .
 had it not been for the grace of my lord , i should certainly have been among those brought !
and were it not that all people had been a single nation , we would certainly have assigned to those who disbelieve in the beneficent allahof silver the roofs of their houses and the stairs by which they ascend .
“ the god of all mankind . ”
he punishes whom he wills , and he grants mercy to whom he wills , and to him you will be restored .
allah has promised those who have believed among you and done righteous deeds that he will surely grant them successionupon the earth just as he granted it to those before them and that he will surely establish for themtheir religion which he has preferred for them and that he will surely substitute for them , after their fear , security , they worship me , not associating anything with me . but whoever disbelieves after that - then those are the defiantly disobedient .
do you regard the providing of water to hajj pilgrims and the maintenance of the holy mosque as similarto someone who has faith in allah andthe last day and wages jihad in the way of allah ? they are not equal with allah , and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and treasures and noble dwellings .
orthat you have a well adorned house of your own , or climb into the sky . we shall never believe that you have climbed into the sky until you bring us a book that we can read .  say ,  all glory belongs to my lord . am i more than a mortal messenger ? 
therein for you will be fruits in plenty , of which you will eat .
a nation asked about them before you , and with it they became unbelievers .
now surely it is of their own lie that they say :
we shall seal your mouths on that day , let your hands speak to us and your feet testify to what you had achieved .
do not give to people weak of understanding your property for which god has made you to supervise . feed and clothe such people and speak to them in a reasonable way .
they said , ‘ invoke your lord for us that he may clarify for us what her colour may be. ’ he said , ‘ he says , she is a cow that is yellow , of a bright hue , pleasing to the onlookers . ’
by the canopy raised high ;
who determined and guided ,
their evil deeds will be revealed to them andwhich they had mocked will surround them .
so he invoked his lord ,  indeed , i am overpowered , so help . 
and for whom i have smoothed the way ,
on the day of judgment you will see the faces of those who had invented falsehood against god blackened . is not hell the dwelling of the arrogant ones ?
and it is he who sends down rain from the sky , and we produce thereby the growth of all things . we produce from it greenery from which we produce grains arranged in layers . and from the palm trees - of its emerging fruit are clusters hanging low . andgardens of grapevines and olives and pomegranates , similar yet varied . look atits fruit when it yields andits ripening . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
you will see the unjust terrified of what they have earned , and it will befall them . as for those who believe and do good deeds , they will be in the meadows of the gardens ; they will have whatever they please in the presence of their lord ; that is the supreme blessing .
believers , guard yourselves and your kindred against a fire whose fuel is human beings and stones , a fire held in the charge of fierce and stern angels who never disobey what he has commanded them , and always do what they are bidden .
on the day when the dreadful calamity will unfold , when people will be summoned to prostrate themselves , and yet they will not be able to prostrate .
who are stingy and enjoin uponpeople stinginess and conceal what allah has given them of his bounty - and we have prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment -
those who are herded into hell on their faces—those are in a worse position , and further astray from the way .
if you could but see when they shall be made to stand by the fire ! they will plead : 'would that we were brought back to life ? then we would not give the lie to the signs of our lord and would be among the believers . '
who strive for betterment ;
thus indeed do we reward those who do right .
go , o my sons , and ascertain concerning joseph and his brother , and despair not of the spirit of allah . lo ! none despaireth of the spirit of allah save disbelieving folk .
were they created from nothing ? or are theycreators ?
o my people ! enter the holy land which allah hath prescribed for you and turn not back to your rearward for then ye become losers .
ask thou of them , which of them will stand surety for that !
believers , have fear of god and speak righteous words .
the originator of the heavens and the earth—how could he have a child when he has had no spouse ? he created all things and he has knowledge of all things .
truly thou canst not cause the dead to listen , nor canst thou cause the deaf to hear the call , when they turn back in retreat .
say : see ye ? if allah were to make the night perpetual over you to the day of judgment , what god is there other than allah , who can give you enlightenment ? will ye not then hearken ?
he shall say : o ! would that i had sent before formy life !
say , ‘ we have faith in allah and what has been sent down to us , and what was sent down to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob and the tribes , and that which moses and jesus were given , and that which the prophets were given from their lord ; we make no distinction between any of them and to him do we submit . ’
they said :  o musa ! in itare a people of great strength , and we shall never enter it , till they leave it ; when they leave , then we will enter . 
surelythe charitable men and the charitable women andset apart for allah a goodly portion , it shall be doubled for them and they shall have a noble reward .
if any of your women is guilty of unnatural offence , bring four of your witnesses to give evidence ; if they testify against them , retain them in the houses until death overtakes them or god provides some other way for them .
and naught prevented men from believing when the guidance came to them , but that they said , 'has god sent forth a mortal as messenger ? '
and they ask thee to inform them : is it true ? say : yea , by my lord , verily it is true , and ye can not escape .
say : what ! shall i seek a lord other than allah ? and he is the lord of all things ; and no soul earnsbut against itself , and no bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another ; then to your lord is your return , so he will inform you of that in which you differed .
verily those who believe , and those who are judaised , and the nazarenes , and the sabians , - whosoever , believeth in allah and the last day and worketh righteously , these ! unto them shall be their hire with their lord , no feal shall come on them nor shall they grieve .
they said :  put him and his brother off , and send callersto the cities to collect-
abraham prayed ,  lord , grant me a righteous son  .
, do not be grievednor distressed about their evil plans against you .
i will cut off your hands and feet on alternate sides and then crucify you all ! 
it is in the origin of the book with us , sublime and wise .
] said :  set me over the storehouses of the land ; i will indeed guard them with full knowledge  .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who are in respect of him associators .
soon will we show them our signs in theregions , and in their own souls , until it becomes manifest to them that this is the truth . is it not enough that thy lord doth witness all things ?
say : 'who has forbidden the adornment which allah has brought forth for his creatures or the good things from among the means of sustenance ? ' say : 'these are for the enjoyment of the believers in this world , and shall be exclusively theirs on the day of resurrection . ' thus do we clearly expound our revelations for those who have knowledge .
and brought , that day , is hell - that day , man will remember , but what good to him will be the remembrance ?
and as for the boy , his parents were believers , and we apprehended that he might impose upon the twain exorbitance and infidelity .
and yet they say :  ar-rahman has begotten a son .  too exalted is he ! in fact , thosewere his honoured votaries .
religion with god is islam . those to whom the scripture was given differed only after knowledge came to them , out of envy among themselves . whoever rejects the signs of god—god is quick to take account .
and cleaving their way therein into the host ,
and we delivered them and their people from the terrible disaster .
that , andthat allah will weaken the plot of the disbelievers .
and when it is said to them :  spend of that with which allah has provided you ,  those who disbelieve say to those who believe :  shall we feed those whom , if allah willed , hewould have fed ? you are only in a plain error . 
whereafter they will be told : “ this is what you used to give the lie to . ”
is it notthat every time they make a covenant , some party among them throw it aside ? - nay , most of them are faithless .
ta . sin . these are the verses of the quran and of the illustrious book
recall to mind that when his lord put abraham to test in certain things and he fulfilled all of them , he said ,  i am going to make you the leader of mankind .  abraham humbly asked ,  does this promise apply to my descendants also ?  he replied ,  my promise does not apply to the transgressors . 
if we so wished , we could have reduced your harvest to rubble , and you would have been left wonder-struck to exclaim :
do those who commit evil deeds think that we will make themto the believers who do good works , so that in life and death they shall be alike ? how evil they judge !
by the sky that is woven .
 but stop them , for they must be asked :
we made the quran easy to learn . is there anyone who would learn ?
with goblets and ewers , and a cup from a spring
and the soldiers of iblees , all together .
but he who does good works , being a believer , shall fear no harm nor any injustice . 
o muhammad , in this very way we have made the criminals the enemies of every prophet , but your lord suffices for you as your guide and helper .
he looked ;
turning to him . and fear you him , and perform the prayer , and be not of the idolaters ,
yea , to those who take for friends unbelievers rather than believers : is it honour they seek among them ? nay , - all honour is with allah .
they say : praise be to allah , who hath fulfilled his promise unto us and hath made us inherit the land , sojourning in the garden where we will ! so bounteous is the wage of workers .
who are steadfast in prayer , who pay the religious tax , and who have strong faith in the life hereafter .
we shall ask hell that day :  are you full ?  it will answer :  are there still more ? 
say :  it is the blessing and mercy of god ; so rejoice in it . it is better than all that you amass . 
are they waiting for the hour of doom to suddenly approach them ? its signs have already appeared . how will they then come to their senses when the hour itself will approach them ?
on the day the sky will be like murky oil ,
“ and entice whomever of them you can with your voice , and rally against them your cavalry and your infantry , and share with them in wealth and children , and make promises to them. ” but satan promises them nothing but delusion .
and when the qur ’ an is recited , listen to it attentively and keep silent , so that you receive mercy .
apart from allah , and direct them to the path of hell ,
the messenger ’ s sole duty is to convey . god knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
surely he is passionate in his love for good things .
- untouched by jinn or mankind before .
when his lord called him in the holy valley of tuwa .
why did they not bring four witnesses against it ? but since they did not bring the witnesses , in god 's sight they are the liars .
indeed , we honoured the progeny of adam , and bore them across land and sea and provided them with good things for their sustenance , and exalted them above many of our creatures .
o believers , fear you god ; and give up the usury that is outstanding , if you are believers .
and the breath of morning
such is the punishment of your lord when he seizes human settlements in the acts of wickedness . surely his hold is grievous and terrible .
had theywanted to join your army , they would have prepared themselves , but god did not wish to motivate them , so he caused them to linger behind with those whose joining you in battle would be of no use .
till when they are come to it , their hearing , their eyes and their skins bear witness against them concerning what they have been doing ,
father , do not worship satan ; for satan has rebelled against the merciful .
those who followed will say ,  if we could only return to the world , we would disown them as they have disowned us .  god will thus show them their actions as a cause of bitter regret and remorse . they shall never emerge from the fire .
he said : by no means ; surely my lord is with me : he will show me a way out .
the day when the trumpet shall be blown : we shall gather all the sinners on that day . their eyes will turn blue with terror
the hypocrites indeed seek to deceive allah , but it is he who outwits them . when they stand up for prayer , they stand up lazily , showing off to the people and not remembering allah except a little ,
perchance your lord will have mercy upon you ; but if you return , we shall return ; and we have made gehenna a prison for the unbelievers .
as for those who strive in us , we shall surely guide them in our ways , and allah is indeed with the virtuous .
but you made a laughing stock of them to the point where it made you forget my remembrance ; and you went on laughing at them .
and we sent no messenger before thee but we inspired him , : there is no allah save me , so worship me .
they are the ones for whom there is a terrible punishment , and they are the ones who will be the biggest losers in the hereafter .
but he who turns his back , and disbelieves ,
do they then feel secure from the coming against them of the covering veil of the torment of allah , or of the coming against them of thehour , all of a sudden while they perceive not ?
and strike for them the similitude of the present life : it is as water that we send down out of heaven , and the plants of the earth mingle with it ; and in the morning it is straw the winds scatter ; and god is omnipotent over everything .
and how many prophets we did send among the earlier people !
as the way of pharaoh 's folk and those before them ; they disbelieved the revelations of allah , and allah took them in their sins . lo ! allah is strong , severe in punishment .
o you who believe ! let not your properties or your children divert you from the remembrance of allah . and whosoever does that , then they are the losers .
to each is a goal to which allah turns him ; then strive togethertowards all that is good . wheresoever ye are , allah will bring you together . for allah hath power over all things .
andfaces , that day , will have upon them dust .
and we had already destroyed generations before you when they wronged , and their messengers had come to them with clear proofs , but they were not to believe . thus do we recompense the criminal people
nay , we gave the good things of this life to these men and their fathers until the period grew long for them ; see they not that we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? is it then they who will win ?
 put your hand in your bosom , it will come forth white without a disease , and draw your hand close to your side to be free from fear . these are two burhanfrom your lord to fir'aunand his chiefs . verily , they are the people who are fasiqun .
nay ! most surely they shall on that day be debarred from their lord .
o you who believe ! do not be like those who abused moses ; but god cleared him of what they said . he was distinguished with god .
do you feel secure that he will not cause the shore to swallow you , or let loose a squall of pebbles upon you ? then you shall find no guardian for yourself .
were it not for allah ’ s grace and his mercy on you , a group of them were bent on leading you astray ; but they do not mislead anyone except themselves , and they can not do you any harm . allah has sent down to you the book and wisdom , and he has taught you what you did not know , and great is allah ’ s grace upon you .
lo ! we reveal unto thee the scripture with the truth , that thou mayst judge between mankind by that which allah showeth thee . and be not thou a pleader for the treacherous ;
he said : 'here are my daughters ; take them , if you would be doing '
the sending down of the book is from allah , the most honourable , the wise .
and mountains will be like flying wool .
when they entered unto him , and said : salaman ! ] said :  indeed ! we are afraid of you . 
therefore wait– they too are waiting .
he said , ' o my people , what think you ? if i stand upon a clear sign from my lord , and he has provided me with fair provision from him -- and i desire not to come behind you , betaking me to that i forbid you ; i desire only to set things right , so far as i am able . my succour is only with god ; in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn , penitent .
he raised the heavens and set up the measure ,
all that the heavens and the earth contain belongs to god , whether you disclose what is in your minds or keep it hidden . god will bring you to account for it . he will forgive whom he will and punish whom he pleases : he has power over all things .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth in six days ; then he mounted the throne . he knoweth all that entereth the earth and all that emergeth therefrom and all that cometh down from the sky and all that ascendeth therein ; and he is with you wheresoever ye may be . and allah is seer of what ye do .
his people had no answer but to say ,  expel lot and his family from the town for they want to be pure . 
then afterwards we drowned the rest .
those are they whose works have failed in the world and the hereafter ; and they have no helpers .
and , o my people ! who would deliver me from allah if i thrust them away ? will ye not then reflect ?
say :  then bring ye a book from allah , which is a better guide than either of them , that i may follow it ! , if ye are truthful ! 
and verily we inspired moses , saying : take away my slaves by night and strike for them a dry path in the sea , fearing not to be overtaken , neither being afraid .
it is no pleasantry .
and those to whom we have given the book rejoice in what is sent down unto thee ; and of the parties some reject some of it . say : ' i have only been commanded to serve god , and not to associate aught with him . to him i call , and to him i turn . '
the punishment shall be doubled to him on the day of resurrection , and he shall abide therein in abasement ;
they will say ,  it is only god who deserves all praise . he has made his promise come true and has given the earth as an inheritance to us . now we live in the gardens as we wished . blessed is the reward of those who labor .
they will not fight against you in a body save in fortified villages or from behind walls . their adversity among themselves is very great . ye think of them as a whole whereas their hearts are divers . that is because they are a folk who have no sense .
or like darkness in a wide , wide sea , waves surging upon waves , with clouds overhanging , darkness on darkness . if you stretch your hand , you could hardly see it . for him whom god does not give any light , there is no light .
and when we made a covenant with you : you shall not shed your blood and you shall not turn your people out of your cities ; then you gave a promise while you witnessed .
through their stiff-neckedness in the land , and the plotting of evil only infoldeth the authors thereof . wait they , then , but the dispensation of the ancients ? and thou wilt not find in dispensation of allah a change , nor wilt thou find in dispensation of allah a turning off
all shall have their degrees , according to what they have wrought , and that he may pay them in full for their works , and they not being wronged .
smiled , amused at her speech , and said :  o lord grant me that i should be grateful for the favours you have bestowed on me and my parents , and do good things of your pleasing ; and admit me among your righteous devotees by your grace . 
he will go before his people on the day of judgment , and lead them into the fire : but woeful indeed will be the place to which they are led !
you will now see those in whose hearts is a disease , that they rush towards the jews and the christians , saying , “ we fear that a misfortune will possibly befall us ” ; so it is likely that allah may soon bring victory , or a command from himself , so they will remain regretting what they had hidden in their hearts .
andthose who are bent on denying the truth of our revelations , they are the people of the left hand ,
it will be said , ‘ enter the gates of hell to remain in it . evil is theabode of the arrogant . ’
and verily we created the heavens and the earth , and all that is between them , in six days , and naught of weariness touched us .
what is wrong with you that you do not speak ? 
or is it that you ask of them any recompense so that they should fear to be weighed down under the burden of debt ?
and when some hurt touches man , he cries to his lord , turning to him in repentance , but when he bestows a favour upon him from himself , he forgets that for which he cried for before , and he sets up rivals to allah , in order to mislead others from his path . say :  take pleasure in your disbelief for a while : surely , you areof the dwellers of the fire ! 
except those on whom allah will have mercy . he is the almighty , the most merciful .
so when he brought to them the truth from us , they said : slay the sons of those who believe with him and keep their women alive ; and the struggle of the unbelievers will only come to a state of perdition .
does he believe that none has seen him ?
indeed they were , before that , indulging in affluence ,
and abraham , when he said to his people , 'serve god , and fear him ; that is better for you , did you know .
as for those whose deeds weigh light in the scales—it is they who have ruined their souls , because they used to wrong our signs .
let not the believers take those who deny the truth for their allies in preference to the believers , anyone who does that will isolate himself completely from god , unless it be to protect yourselves against them in this way . god admonishes you to fear him : for , to god shall all return .
undoubtedly , ithas proved true for most of them , so they will not believe .
not alike are the two seas : this one sweet and agreeable , pleasant to drink , and that one briny and bitter , and from each you eat fresh meat and obtain ornaments , which you wear . and you see the ships plowing through them , that you may seek of his bounty , and so that you may give thanks .
in fact , on that day , they will be submissive .
indeed ye have put forth a thing most monstrous !
for a great day ?
we shall brand him on his nose .
the command that we have been sending
say :  do you order me to worship other than allah o you fools ? 
she said , ' o council , pronounce to me concerning my affair ; i am not used to decide an affair until you bear me witness . '
how many a nation did we destroy before them ! they cried out , but the time for deliverance was already past .
and with them will be chaste females , restraining their glances , with wide and beautiful eyes .
they replied : 'build for him a building and cast him into the fire '
it is he who has made you successors upon the earth . and whoever disbelieves - upon him will behis disbelief . and the disbelief of the disbelievers does not increase them in the sight of their lord except in hatred ; and the disbelief of the disbelievers does not increase them except in loss .
they will ask thee for a pronouncement . say : 'god pronounces to you concerning the indirect heirs . if a man perishes having no children , but he has a sister , she shall receive a half of what he leaves , and he is her heir if she has no children . if there be two sisters , they shall receive two-thirds of what he leaves ; if there be brothers and sisters , the male shall receive the portion of two females . god makes clear to you , lest you go astray ; god has knowledge of everything .
the setting free of a slave ,
certainly we showed him all our signs . but he deniedand refused .
the evil one has got the better of them : so he has made them lose the remembrance of allah . they are the party of the evil one . truly , it is the party of the evil one that will perish !
 then thereafter will come a year in which people will have abundant rain and in which they will press . 
do you marvel at this discourse ?
abasement shall be pitched upon them wherever they are found , except they are in a bond from allah , and a bond of the people . they have incurred theanger of allah and have been humiliated , because they disbelieved the verses of allah and unjustly slew his prophets and because they disobeyed and were transgressors .
and one of them who should say : lo ! i am a god beside him , that one we should repay with hell . thus we repay wrong-doers .
nothing is indeed hidden from allah in the earth or in the sky .
it is they who are truly the faithful . they shall have ranks near their lord , forgiveness and a noble provision .
they will remain in it for ages .
to allah alone belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . he will requite the evil-doers for their deeds and bestow a goodly reward on those who have done good ,
“ o my people , ask forgiveness from your lord , and repent to him . he will release the sky pouring down upon you , and will add strength to your strength . and do not turn away and be wicked . ”
and if they wish to deceive you , then indeed allah is sufficient for you ; it is he who has given you strength , with his help and with the muslims .
and indeed we gave musathe scripture , but dispute arose therein . and had it not been for a word that went forth before from your lord , and the matter would have been settled between them . but truly , they are in grave doubt thereto .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth , in order to repay those who do evil for what they have done , and give an excellent reward to those who do good .
the unbelievers will dwell in hell . it will not be decreed for them to die nor will their torment be relieved . thus do we recompense the ungrateful ones .
then we roused them to find out which of the party had the correct account of the duration of their sleep in the cave .
or do they say , 'he has forged against god a lie ? ' but if god wills , he will set a seal on thy heart ; and god blots out falsehood and verifies the truth by his words ; he knows the thoughts within the breasts .
o ye who believe ! wine and gambling and stone altars and divining arrows are only an abomination , a handiwork of satan , shun it wherefore , that haply ye may fare well .
that which is bred up in outward show , and in dispute can not make itself plain ?
andibrahimwhen he said to his people :  worship allah , and fear him , that is better for you if you did but know .
, you never looked forward for the book to be revealed to you . it is out of sheer mercy of your lord that it was . so do not lend any support to the unbelievers .
and whosoever is in the earth , altogether , so that it might save him .
 the lord of moses and aaron . 
and remember when god took a promise from the people of the book to make itsknown to mankind , and not keep back any part of it , they set aside , and sold it away for a little gain but how wretched the bargain that they made !
aye ! he hath come with the truth , and he confesseth to the sent ones .
do they seek to hasten on our torment ?
and bow in homage part of the night , and glorify him far into the night .
who collects and hordes wealth ,
those who say ,  our lord , indeed we have believed , so forgive us our sins and protect us from the punishment of the fire , 
and they disobeyed the apostle of their lord , so he punished them with a vehement punishment .
when he created you bystages ?
so verily on that day they all in the torment will be sharers .
if they cry thee lies , those before them also cried lies ; their messengers came to them with the clear signs , the psalms , the illuminating book ;
but when he delivered them , behold ! they rebelin the earth wrongfully . o mankind ! your rebellionis only against your ownselves , - a brief enjoyment of this worldly life , thenunto us is your return , and we shall inform you that which you used to do .
then he turned upon them , strikingwithright hand .
a man came running from the far side of the city , and said ,  moses , the authorities are conspiring to kill you , so leave the city . i am one of your well-wishers . 
those who never invoke any other deity besides god , nor take a life which god has made sacred , except with the right to do so , nor commit adultery . anyone who does that shall face punishment :
the magicians came to the pharaoh and said ,  we must have our reward if we are to gain a victory over him  .
and he giveth you of all ye ask of him , and if ye would count the bounty of allah ye can not reckon it . lo ! man is verily a wrong-doer , an ingrate .
on the day when consciences are examined ,
 so cause a piece of the heaven to fall on us , if you are of the truthful ! 
and of the grazing livestock are carriersand thosesmall . eat of what allah has provided for you and do not follow the footsteps of satan . indeed , he is to you a clear enemy .
 enter you therein in peace and security ; this is a day of eternal life ! 
grapes , vegetables ,
then arrange to do ,
then we sent moses and aaron with our miracles to the pharaoh and his people . these people also proved to be arrogant . they were wicked people .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them and he has power over all things .
those who turn away from all that is frivolous ;
thus . and we will marry them to fair women with large , eyes .
he knows whatever is before them and whatsoever is remote from them and they do not intercede except for him , intercession on whose behalf pleases him , and they stand constantly in awe of him .
and they forbid it , and keep afar from it , and it is only themselves they destroy , but they are not aware .
when theare told to refer to god 's revelations and to the messenger , they try to find excuses to stay away from you .
who is more unjust than those who strive to destroy the mosques and prevent others from commemorating the name of god therein who could not enter the mosques except with fear . they , , will be disgraced in this life and will receive great torment in the life hereafter .
but conveyancefrom allah , and his messages ; and whoso disobeyeth allah and his messenger , lo ! his is fire of hell , wherein such dwell for ever .
that is the grace from allah , and sufficeth allah as knower !
but when the eyes are dazzled ,
we split them up into twelve tribal communities , and we revealed to moses , when his people asked him for water , , ‘ strike the rock with your staff , ’ whereat twelve fountains gushed forth from it . every tribe came to know its drinking-place . and we shaded them with clouds , and we sent down to them manna and quails : ‘ eat of the good things we have provided you. ’ and they did not wrong us , but they used to wrongthemselves .
by no means ! verily he hath been unto our signs a foe .
he will guide them and amend their condition
unlawful are your mothers and daughters and your sisters to you , and the sisters of your fathers and your mothers , and the daughters of your brothers and sisters , and foster mothers , foster sisters , and the mothers of your wives , and the daughters of the wives you have slept with who are under your charge ; but in case you have not slept with them there is no offence ; and the wives of your own begotten sons ; and marrying two sisters is unlawful . what happened in the past : god is forgiving and kind .
he it is who created you from a single being , and of the samedid he make his mate , that he might incline to her ; so when he covers her she bears a light burden , then moves about with it ; but when it grows heavy , they both call upon allah , their lord : if thou givest us a good one , we shall certainly be of the grateful ones .
the byzantines has been vanquished
a bounty from thy lord ; that is the mighty triumph .
is it not a guidance to them , how many generations we destroyed before them in whose dwelling-places they walk ? surely in that are signs ; what , will they not hear ?
they will be given pure wine out of sealed containers
and when it is said unto them : prostrate to the beneficent ! they say : and what is the beneficent ? are we to prostrate to whatever thoubiddest us ? and it increaseth aversion in them .
when those who believe in our revelations come to you , say to them :  peace on you .  your lord has prescribed grace for himself , so that in case one of you commits evil out of ignorance , then feels repentant and reforms , he may be forgiving and kind .
and other sufferings of the kind .
and we ordained upon man concerning his parents ; his mother bore him enduring weakness upon weakness , and his suckling is up to two years – therefore be thankful to me and to your parents ; finally towards me is the return .
they hurled upon them stones of baked clay ;
and hell will be brought into view for the perverse ,
 and give me a minister from my family ,
o you who believe , when you converse privately , do not talk of iniquity , rebellion , and disobedience to the prophet , but talk of goodness and piety , and fear god before whom you will be gathered .
he causes to grow for you thereby the crops , olives , palm trees , grapevines , and from all the fruits . indeed in that is a sign for a people who give thought .
“ and give me proper fame among the succeeding generations . ”
thy lord does create and choose as he pleases : no choice have they : glory to allah ! and far is he above the partners they ascribe !
and to others from among themwho have not yet joined them . and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the jews said , “ uzair is the son of allah ” , and the christians said “ the messiah is the son of allah ” ; they utter this from their own mouths ; they speak like the former disbelievers ; may allah kill them ; where are they reverting !
thereafter , we utterly destroyed the rest ,
what , have they not journeyed in the land and beheld how was the end of those before them ? they were stronger than themselves in might , and they ploughed up the earth and cultivated it more than they themselves have cultivated it ; and their messengers came to them with the clear signs ; and god would never wrong them , but themselves they wronged .
those who deny our revelations are deaf , dumb , and lost in the dark . god sends whosoever he wills astray , and leads whom he will to the straight path .
then we gave moses the book , completingto the righteous , explaining everything clearly , as guidance and mercy , so that they might believe in meeting their lord .
andwhen musasaid to his people :  call to mind allah 's favour to you , when he delivered you from fir'aun'speople who were afflicting you with horrible torment , and were slaughtering your sons and letting your women alive , and in it was a tremendous trial from your lord . 
surely there is a sign in this , but most of them would not believe .
and admit them , lord , to the eternal garden you have promised to them , together with their righteous ancestors , spouses , and offspring : you alone are the almighty ; the all wise .
and we wished to be gracious to those who were being depressed in the land , to make them leadersand make them heirs ,
and the throescompelled her to betake herself to the trunk of a palm tree . she said : oh , would that i had died before this , and had been a thing quite forgotten !
our lord ! and give us that which thou hast promised to us by thy messengers . confound us not upon the day of resurrection . lo ! thou breakest not the tryst .
but when moses came unto them with our clear tokens , they said : this is naught but invented magic . we never heard of this among our fathers of old .
and who belieth the good ,
and musa said : my lord best knoweth him who bringeth guidance from before him and him whose will be the happy end of the abode . verily the wrong-doers shall not thrive .
verily we ! it hath been revealed unto us that the torment will be for him who belieth and turneth away .
have you then considered al-lat , and al-'uzza .
and exalted is the grandeur of our lord—he never had a mate , nor a child .
beforehand they had already sought to stir up sedition , and turned things upside down for you , until the truth came , and the command of allah appeared , although they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , therefore you should not be of the doubters .
nothing is said to you , , except what was already said to the messengers before you . indeed , your lord is a possessor of forgiveness and a possessor of painful penalty .
amid thornless lote-trees ,
those who turn their backs after the way of guidance has been opened to them , have been surely tempted by satan and beguiled by illusory hopes .
but when they saw it they said : 'we have surely gone astray .
follow those who do not ask you for any reward and who are rightly guided .
no ill speech will they hear therein or any falsehood -
thus when fear had left abraham and the good news had been conveyed to him , he began to dispute with us concerning the people of lot .
there is no good in much of their private counsels , except for him who advocates charity , or kindness , or reconciliation between people . whoever does that , seeking god ’ s approval , we will give him a great compensation .
and assuredly musa came unto you with evidence , then ye betook the calf after him , and ye were wrong-doers .
from the mischief of the whispering , elusive prompter who returns again and again ,
that god may distinguish the corrupt from the good , and place the corrupt one upon another , and so heap them up all together , and put them in gehenna ; those are the losers .
then fir'aunsent callers tothe cities .
which floated on the water before our very eyes . the flood was a recompense for the deeds of the disbelievers .
andothers who have acknowledged their faults . they mixed a righteous action with another that was bad . it may be that allah will relent toward them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and we prescribed unto them therein : a life for a life , and an eye for an eye , and a nose for a nose , and an ear for an ear , and a tooth for a tooth , and wounds in reprisal , then whosoever forgoeth it , then it shall be for him an expiation . and whosoever judgeth not by that which allah hath sent down - those then ! they are the wrong-doers .
those who believe and do right : joy is for them , and blissjourney 's end .
you should see them brought before the fire , abject in disgrace , looking stealthily . and those who believe will say :  they who forfeit their souls and families on the day of resurrection will really be losers .  is it not that sinners will suffer a lasting torment ?
and they said : o magician ! call on your lord for our sake , as he has made the covenant with you ; we shall surely be the followers of the right way .
the sinners had been laughing at the believers .
and shaitanwill say when the matter has been decided :  verily , allah promised you a promise of truth . and i too promised you , but i betrayed you . i had no authority over you except that i called you , so you responded to me . so blame me not , but blame yourselves . i can not help you , nor can you help me . i deny your former act in associating meas a partner with allah . verily , there is a painful torment for the zalimun . 
in the past as guidance for mankind ; he hassent down the standard by which to discern the true from the false . surely those who deny god 's signs will suffer severe punishment . god is mighty and capable of retribution .
god has bought from the believers their selves and their possessions against the gift of paradise ; they fight in the way of god ; they kill , and are killed ; that is a promise binding upon god in the torah , and the gospel , and the koran ; and who fulfils his covenant truer than god ? so rejoice in the bargain you have made with him ; that is the mighty triumph .
lo ! they who spread the slander are a gang among you . deem it not a bad thing for you ; nay , it is good for you . unto every man of themthat which he hath earned of the sin ; and as for him among them who had the greater share therein , his will be an awful doom .
and by what you do not see ,
whosoever is guided is only guided for his own self , and whosoever goes astray it is only against it . no soul shall bear another 's burden . nor do we punish until we have sent a messenger .
we charge no soul with more than it can bear . we have a book with us which speaks the truth , and they shall not be wronged .
the day they will be tormented over the fire
and if you invite them to guidance , they will not follow you ; it is the same to you whether you invite them or you are silent .
the people said ,  we have ill omens about you . if you will not desist , we shall stone you and make you suffer a painful torment  .
and before you , we did not appoint on earth a never-ending life for any human ; will they , if you depart , become immortal ?
until , when death comes to one of them he says : 'my lord , let me go back ,
they said , 'we serve idols , and continue cleaving to them .
theybrothers ] said :  the penalty should be that he , in whose bag it is found , should be held for the punishment . thus we punish the zalimun ! 
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is therein , and he is able to do all things .
there are among the people such who worship allah andon the very edge . when goodness comes to him , he is content , but if a trial befalls him he falls upon his face , he loses this world and the everlasting life ; that is indeed a clear loss .
because , he neither believed nor prayed ;
certainly they disbelieve who say : surely allah is the thirdof the three ; and there is no god but the one allah , and if they desist not from what they say , a painful chastisement shall befall those among them who disbelieve .
or are you asking them for any reward ? but the reward of your lord is the best , for he is the best of providers ,
this quran could not have been produced by anyone other than god . in fact , it is a confirmation of what preceded it , and an elaboration of the book . there is no doubt about it—it is from the lord of the universe .
and when god took compact with those who had been given the book : 'you shall make it clear unto the people , and not conceal it . ' but they rejected it behind their backs and sold it for a small price -- how evil was that their selling !
and helped them , so that they became the victors ;
their lord gives them glad tidings of a mercy from him , and that he is pleased , and of gardensfor them wherein are everlasting delights .
moses said , 'pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of all being ,
so the earthquake took them unawares , and they lay prostrate in their homes in the morning !
 and swell not thy cheekat men , nor walk in insolence through the earth ; for allah loveth not any arrogant boaster .
intercession with him is of no value , except for someone he has permitted . until , when fear has subsided from their hearts , they will say , “ what did your lord say ? ” they will say , “ the truth , and he is the high , the great . ”
surely theobstruct them from the path , though they think they are rightly guided , --
have they not seen how we lead the water to the barren land and therewith bring forth crops whereof their cattle eat , and they themselves ? will they not then see ?
said he , 'we will strengthen thy arm by means of thy brother , and we shall appoint . to you an authority , so that they shall not reach you because of our signs ; you , and whoso follows you , shall be the victors . '
and should anyone alter it after hearing it , its sin shall indeed lie on those who alter it . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and among them is he who says :  grant me leave to stay behind , and do not expose me to temptation .  lo ! they have already fallen into temptation . surely hell encompasses the unbelievers .
and the birds gathered : all with him did turn .
it is the truth from thy lord , so be not thou of those who waver .
but those who reject our ayat , the torment will touch them for their disbelief . .
but : allah is your friend , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs will be an awful doom ; and those who believe and do good works , theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward .
do theyascribethat which do not create anything , but are themselves created ?
containing correct and straight laws from allah .
we sat in observatories to listen ; but any one who listened found a shooting star in wait for him .
we shall have you recite , then you will not forget
this is the legacy he left to his descendants so that they may turn .
and lest , if an affliction had afflicted them for that which their hands had sent before , they should have said : our lord ! wherefore sent not thou an apostle unto us that we might have followed thy revelations and been of the believers !
and the earth , he expanded it after that .
when thou seest men engaged in vain discourse about our signs , turn away from them unless they turn to a different theme . if satan ever makes thee forget , then after recollection , sit not thou in the company of those who do wrong .
is then the one who creates like the one who does not create ? will you not , then , take heed ?
if anyone seeks glory , let him know that glory belongs to god alone . good words ascend to him and righteous deeds are exalted by him . those who plot evil deeds shall be sternly punished and their plotting will come to nothing .
of an orphaned relative
and we turned it uppermost nethermost and rained on it stones of baked clay .
they defeated their enemy through god 's will . david slew goliath and god granted david the kingdom and wisdom and also taught him whatever he wanted . had god not made one group of people repel the other , the earth would have become full of corruption , but god is generous to his creatures .
verily allah is the knower of the unseen of the heavens and the earth . verily , he is the knower of that which is in the breasts .
they are the ones who were cursed by god ; and those who are cursed by god will have none to protect them .
and he wished to scare them from the land , but we drowned him and those with him , all together .
, good tidings await those who eschew serving false gods and penitently return to allah . , give good tidings to my servants ,
and when they see a sign , they ridicule
just think ! you hold them as your friends but they do not , even though you believe in all the scriptures . when they meet you they say :  we believe ;  but when they are alone they bite their fingers in rage . say :  die of your rage . god is aware of the secrets of the hearts . 
the day when man shall rememberthat he strove for ,
and he glanced a glance at the stars
then let them produce a statement like it , if they should be truthful .
they bid thee hasten on the doom . and if a term had not been appointed , the doom would assuredly have come unto them . and verily it will come upon them suddenly when they perceive not .
we sent noah to his people : “ warn your people before there comes upon them a painful punishment . ”
o men , fear your lord ! surely the earthquake of the hour is a mighty thing ;
and verily in the love of wealth he is vehement ,
what ! would they then hasten on our chastisement ?
and assuredly we have left thereof manifest sign for a people who reflect .
and leave me withthe deniers , those of ease , and allow them respite a little .
they have not the power to help them : but they will be brought upas a troop .
and assuredly those before them belied ; then what wise hath been my wrath !
the people ask ,  what should we spend ?  tell them ,  whatever you spend , spend for your parents , your relatives , orphans , the needy and the wayfarer ; and whatever good you do , allah has knowledge of it .
believers , do not disrespect the reminders of god , the sacred months , the animals brought for sacrifice , or what is marked for sacrificial offering or the people heading to the precinct of the sacred house to seek the favor and pleasure of their lord . once the restrictions of ihram are over , you may hunt . do not let the hostility of a group of people keep you away from the sacred mosque or make you express animosity . co-operate with each other in righteousness and piety , not in sin and hostility . have fear of god ; he is stern in his retribution .
it does not behove a believer , male or female , that when allah and his messenger have decided an affair they should exercise their choice . and whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has strayed to manifest error .
we have decreed death among you , and we will not be outstripped .
say : if your fathers , your sons , your brothers , your wives , your kindred , the wealth that you have gained , the commerce in which you fear a decline , and the dwellings in which you delight are dearer to you than allah and his messenger , and striving hard and fighting in his cause , then wait until allah brings about his decision . and allah guides not the people who are al-fasiqun .
and it is thy lord shall muster them , and he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; indeed they are among those who deserve our proximity .
did we not destroy the former peoples ?
all praise belongs to god , lord of the universe ,
upon that day the recourse shall be to thy lord .
then he was a clot of blood , then he created and formed him
those who believe not in the hereafter , we have decked out fair for them their works , and they wander blindly ;
then we created of the drop a clot then we created of the clot a tissue then we created of the tissue bones then we garmented the bones in flesh ; thereafter we produced him as another creature . so blessed be god , the fairest of creators !
and certainly we created man of an extract of clay ,
that shall turn things upside down :
they will be ranged before your lord , standing in rows and he will say to them ,  now you have come to us as we created you at first . but you supposed that we would not appoint the time for the fulfillment of our promise to you . 
 it is true we were promised this , - we and our fathers before : these are nothing but tales of the ancients . 
except the people of the right hand ,
and follow thou whatsoever is revealed unto thee , and endure until allah judgeth , and he is the best of judges .
and by the earth which opens out , -
and the hell shall be made manifest to him who sees
it is allah who disposed the sea for you so that the ships may sail in it by his command , that you may seek of his bounty and that you may give thanks .
and whoever is an ally of allah and his messenger and those who have believed - indeed , the party of allah - they will be the predominant .
and who sendeth down from the heaven water in measure ; then we quicken a dead land therewith : even so ye shall be brought forth .
because of their wrongs they were drowned , then made to enter fire , so they did not find any helpers besides allah .
those unto whom we gave the scripture recogniseas they recognise their sons . but lo ! a party of them knowingly conceal the truth .
and zakariyya ! recall what time he cried unto his lord : my lord ! leave me not solitary , though thou art the best of heirs .
say : o people ! if you are in doubt as to my religion , theni do not serve those whom you serve besides allah but i do serve allah , who will cause you to die , and i am commanded that i should be of the believers .
and we delivered him and lut to the land wherein we had placed our blessings for the worlds .
already allah knows the hinderers among you and thosewho say to their brothers ,  come to us ,  and do not go to battle , except for a few ,
it 's explanation is upon us .
and indeed we sent nooh and ibrahim , and placed prophethood and the book among their descendants , so some among them took to guidance ; and many of them are sinners .
believers , remember the favor which allah bestowed upon you when certain people were about to stretch their hands towards you , but he restrained them . have fear of allah . in allah let the believers put their trust .
we gave him isaac and jacob : allguided : and before him , we guided noah , and among his progeny , david , solomon , job , joseph , moses , and aaron : thus do we reward those who do good :
alif lam mim
leave to me those who belie , those who lead a life of pleasure , and bear with them yet a little while .
it shall insistently summon him who turned his back and retreated ,
on the day when the great calamity comes ,
again , indeed , they shall know !
he shall say : by allah ! you had almost caused me to perish ;
he who ordained the quran for you will return you home . say , “ my lord knows best who comes with guidance , and who is in manifest error . ”
and when the sorcerers came , musasaid to them :  cast down what you want to cast ! 
surely we know well that they say about you :  it is only a human being who teaches him ,  that he whom they maliciously hint at is of foreign tongue , while thisis plain arabic speech .
and we found not within them other than ahouse of muslims .
on that night , the angels and the spirit come down by the permission of their lord with his decrees for all matters ;
and the trumpet is blown and lo ! from the graves they hie unto their lord ,
they fear their lord from above them and do as they are commanded .
and tothamudsalih , their brother . he said , ‘ o my people , worship allah ! you have no other god besides him . there has certainly come to you a manifest proof from your lord . this she-camel of allah is a sign for you . let her alone to grazein allah ’ s land , and do not cause her any harm , for then you shall be seized by a painful punishment .
o you who disbelieve ! do not urge excuses today ; you shall be rewarded only according to what you did .
taught man that which he knew not .
and indeed we have beautified the lower heaven with lamps , and have made them weapons against the devils , and have kept prepared for them the punishment of the blazing fire .
he would certainly have remained inside the fish until the day of resurrection .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and streams ,
and zachariah and john and jesus and elias . each onewas of the righteous .
and who speaks better than he who calls to allah while he himself does good , and says : i am surely of those who submit ?
and the 'aad and the thamud and the dwellers of the pass and generations in-between many .
pharoah and those before him and the inhabitants of the overthrown cities persistently committed grave sins .
as for those who disbelieve i shall chastise them with a heavy chastisement in the world and the hereafter ; and they will have no helpers .
but as for those who were faithless and denied our signs and the encounter of the hereafter , they will be brought to the punishment .
they ask you to hasten the punishment ; god will never go back on his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your reckoning .
he replied ,  you will certainly be afflicted by wickedness and the wrath of god . do you dispute with me about the names of that which you and your fathers have invented ? god has given no authority to those names . wait for god 's decree and i , too , am waiting with you . 
this is the remembrance of the mercy of your lord upon his bondman zakaria .
say thou : the appointment to you is for a day which ye can not put back for one hour nor can ye anticipate .
on that day no one ’ s intercession shall benefit except his to whom the most gracious has given permission and whose word he has liked .
and as for the poets—the deviators follow them .
so when they vexed us , we took vengeance on them , and we drowned them all .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be certainly brought to judgment ?
why should we not believe in god and the truth that has come to us and hope that the lord will admit us into the company of the righteous people ? 
no bearer shall bear another ’ s burden , and should someone heavily burdened callto carry it , nothing of it will be carriedeven if he should be a near relative . you can only warn those who fear their lord in secret and maintain the prayer . whoever purifies himself , purifies only for his own sake , and to allah is the return .
when the messengerscame to them from the front and from the rear , saying : “ do not serve any but allah ” ; they said : “ had our lord so willed , he would have sent down angels . so we deny the message you have brought . ”
he does not give birth , nor was he born ,
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then presented them to the angels and said , ‘ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ’
this is of the news of the unseen which we reveal unto you , neither you nor your people knew them before this . so be patient . surely , theend is for the muttaqun
the established way of allah which has occurred before . and never will you find in the way of allah any change .
and brought their hearts together . hadst thou expended all that is in the earth , thou couldst not have brought their hearts together ; but god brought their hearts together ; surely he is all-mighty , all-wise .
a multitude of those of old
or giving food upon a day of hunger
he said : i shall ask forgiveness for you of my lord . lo ! he is the forgiving , the merciful .
these are the limits of allah ; and whoever obeys allah and his noble messenger – allah will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow – abiding in it forever ; and this is the great success .
and did they not obtain guidance by the fact that we did destroy many generations before them , so now they walk in their houses ? indeed in this are signs ; so do they not heed ?
on the day when the earth will be changed to another earth and so will be the heavens , and theywill appear before allah , the one , the irresistible .
o dawood ! surely we have made you a ruler in the land ; so judge between men with justice and do not follow desire , lest it should lead you astray from the path of allah ; those who go astray from the path of allah , they shall surely have a severe punishment because they forgot the day of reckoning .
surely he was among our faithful creatures .
that he is the lord of sirius ;
and prepare against them whatever you are able of power and of steeds of war by which you may terrify the enemy of allah and your enemy and others besides them whom you do not knowwhom allah knows . and whatever you spend in the cause of allah will be fully repaid to you , and you will not be wronged .
know that the life of the world is only play , and idle talk , and pageantry , and boasting among you , and rivalry in respect of wealth and children ; as the likeness of vegetation after rain , whereof the growth is pleasing to the husbandman , but afterward it drieth up and thou seest it turning yellow , then it becometh straw . and in the hereafter there is grievous punishment , andforgiveness from allah and his good pleasure , whereas the life of the world is but matter of illusion .
so they returned with allah ’ s blessing and grace , untouched by any harm . they pursued the pleasure of allah , and allah is dispenser of a great grace .
abraham was certainly a forbearing , compassionate , and tender-hearted person .
it is indeed a reminder to you and to your nation , and without doubt you shall be questioned .
then turn your vision again , and then again ; in the end your vision will come back to you , worn out and frustrated .
none , except allah , can avert it .
and all what lies in the breasts is opened –
satan threatens you with want , and orders youshameful acts . but god promises his pardon and grace , for god is bounteous and all-knowing .
we gave moses the scripture after we had annihilated the previous generations ; as an illumination for mankind , and guidance , and mercy , so that they may remember .
they swear their strongest oaths by allah , that allah will not raise up those who die : nay , but it is a promiseon him in truth : but most among mankind realise it not .
we certainly know that their statements sorely grieve you .
it is not possible for a human being unto whom allah hath vouchsafed the book and wisdom and prophethood that he should thereafter say unto men : be ye worshippers of me , beside allah ; but be ye faithful servants of the lord , seeing that ye are wont to teach the books and seeing that ye are wont to exercise yourselves therein .
are you under the illusion that you will enter paradise whereas the suffering , which came to those before you , has not yet come to you ? hardship and adversity befell them and they were shaken , to the extent that the noble messenger and the believers along with him said , “ when will the help of allah come ? ” ; pay heed ! allah ’ s help is surely near .
he it is who drove out the disbelievers among the people of the scripturefrom their homes at the first gathering . you did not think that they would get out . and they thought that their fortresses would defend them from allah ! but allah'sreached them from a place whereof they expected it not , and he cast terror into their hearts , so that they destroyed their own dwellings with their own hands and the hands of the believers . then take admonition , o you with eyes .
in this there is an evidence of the truth , but many of them did not have any faith .
and we made his offspring the only survivors .
and they will offersubmission to allahon that day , and their invented false deities , messengers , etc . ] will vanish from them .
there hath perished from me my authority .
we have revealed the quran to you in the arabic language so that you could warn the people of the mother townand those around it of the inevitable day of resurrection when some will go to paradise and others to hell .
and i swear by the blaming soul .
equal unto him is he among you who hideth the word and he who publisheth it , and he who hideth himself in the night and he who goeth about freely in the day .
to create all of you or to resurrect all of you is to him likea single person . verily allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
they said , ‘ confused nightmares , and we do not know the interpretation of nightmares . ’
roast in it , bear it with or without patience , it is the same , you are only being recompensed for that which you used to do '
and as for those who disbelieved , i will punish them with a severe punishment in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers . 
and the two seas are not alike ; this is sweet , very sweet and palatable – and this is salty , bitter ; and from each you eat fresh meat and extract the ornament which you wear ; and you see the ship cleaving through it , so that you may seek his munificence , and in some way become grateful .
half of it , or a little less than that ,
perish will those who just guess and speculate ,
and they give food , inspite of their love for it , to miskin , the orphan , and the captive ,
pharaoh said : ye believe in him before i give you leave ! lo ! this is the plot that ye have plotted in the city that ye may drive its people hence . but ye shall come to know !
do they say ,  he is only a poet and we are waiting to see him die ! ? 
and they say , ‘ when will this promise be fulfilled , should you be truthful ? ’
say , ‘ i have been forbidden to worship those whom you invoke besides allah. ’ say , ‘ i do not follow your desires , for then i will have gone astray , and i will not be among theguided . ’
there are certainly signs in that for those who can learn a lesson --
and when the time of the noble messengers arrives .
he who settled us in the home of permanence , by his grace , where boredom will not touch us , and fatigue will not afflict us . ”
is it then the judgment ofignorance that they desire ? and who is better than allah to judge for a people who are sure ?
except for the sincere servants of god .
in his mercy he has made for you the night and the day , during which you may rest , and seek his bounty and be grateful .
and undoubtedly the reward of the hereafter is better , for those who accept faith and remain pious .
he asked :  do they hear you when you call them
as for those who strive against our revelations , seeking to undermine them—for them is a punishment of a painful plague .
and pollution shun .
he will guide them and set their condition right
untouched by any man or jinn , before them .
they will enter gardens of eternity , where rivers will flow at their feet . there they will have all that they wish for . thus god rewards the righteous ,
our lord ! do not make us a test for the faithless , and forgive us . our lord ! indeed you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . ’
if you are ungrateful , then remember ! god is independent of you , and he does not favour ingratitude on the part of his creatures . if you are grateful he will be pleased with you . for no one who carries a burden bears another 's load ; and your returning is to your lord , when he will tell you what you used to do . surely he knows what is in the hearts .
didst thouobserve him who turned away ,
say :  o ye men ! now truth hath reached you from your lord ! those who receive guidance , do so for the good of their own souls ; those who stray , do so to their own loss : and i am notover you to arrange your affairs . 
by the manifest bookthat makes things clear ,
 except our first death , and that we shall not be punished ? 
yonder is the hell which the culprits belied .
they will reply : 'we were not among those who prayed
fain would they that ye disbelieved even as they have disbelieved , so that ye may be all alike . wherefore take not friends from among them until they migrate for the sake of allah ; and if they turn away , then lay hold of them and slay them , wheresoever ye find them , and take not from among them a friend or a helper .
yet when he removes the evil from you , lo ! a party of you associate others with their lord ;
so disregard them , and say , ‘ peace ! ’ soon they will know .
his are the ships , raised above the sea like landmarks .
who are more unjust than those who are reminded of the revelations of their lord but have disregarded them and have forgotten their deeds ? we have veiled their hearts and sealed their ears so that they can not understand . even if you call them to the right path , they will never accept guidance .
then the end of those who committed evil was evil , for they belied the signs of allah and they were wont to mock at them .
o our lord ! give them a double punishment and curse them with a great curse .
indeed your lord ’ s punishment will surely take place .
verily we ! we have sent down unto thee the book for mankind ? with truth . then whosoever receiveth guidance , it is for his soul and whosoever strayeth , strayeth only to its hurt ; and thou art not over them a trustee .
thus do we requite him who transgresses and does not believe in the signs of your lord ; and surely the punishment of the hereafter is even more terrible and more enduring .
and they say , ‘ these cattle and tillage are a taboo : none may eat them except whom we please , ’ so they maintain , and there are cattle whose backs are forbidden and cattle over which they do not mention allah ’ s name , fabricating a lie against him . soon he will requite them for what they used to fabricate .
o believers , take not for friends a people against whom god is wrathful , and who have despaired of the world to come , even as the unbelievers have despaired of the inhabitants of the tombs .
that we laid within a sure lodging
and they assert a relationship between him and the jinn ; and certainly the jinn do know that they shall surely be brought up ;
these are announcements relating to the unseen which we reveal to you , you did not know them -- you nor your people -- before this ; therefore be patient ; surely the end is for those who guard .
certainly , your efforts and deeds are diverse ;
it were those who disbelieved who hindered you fromthe holy mosque , preventing your offerings from arriving at the place of sacrifice . had it not been forbelievers , men and women , of whom you were unaware , and whom you might have trampled and thus incurred guilt unknowingly on account of them , .so that god may admit into his favour whom he willed . if thesehad been separated from them , he would have inflicted a grievous punishment on the unbelievers .
hast thou not seen how thy lord did with ad ,
answered :  thus will it be . your lord said : 'this is easy for me ; for when i brought you into being you were nothing . '
have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you ? they desire to summon one another to the judgment of the shaitan , though they were commanded to deny him , and the shaitan desires to lead them astray into a remote error .
then we brought forth such believers as were there .
has the story of the hordes
they used not to forbid one another from the munkarwhich they committed . vile indeed was what they used to do .
the likeness of those who disbelieve in their lord : their works are as ashes , whereon the wind blows strong upon a tempestuous day ; they have no power over that they have earned - that is the far error !
when they lost all hope , they moved into a corner whispering to each other . the eldest among them said ,  do you not remember that you had solemnly promised our father to return benjamin to him and that before this you had broken your promise concerning joseph ? i shall never leave this land until my father gives me permission or god decides for me ; he is the best judge .
we have sent down to you revelations giving clear guidance and cited examples of the peoples who went before you to serve as warning and we have imparted admonitions for the god-fearing .
out of the mountains did they hewedifices , secure .
a variety of delicious fruits ; and they shall be honoured
and they did not appraise allah with true appraisal when they said ,  allah did not reveal to a human being anything .  say ,  who revealed the scripture that moses brought as light and guidance to the people ? youmake it into pages , disclosingit and concealing much . and you were taught that which you knew not - neither you nor your fathers .  say ,  allah .  then leave them in theirdiscourse , amusing themselves .
it is a tree that comes forth in the root of hell ;
indeed we have warned you of a punishment near at hand—the day when a person will observe what his hands have sent ahead and the faithless one will say , ‘ i wish i were dust ! ’
surely the godfearing shall be in gardens and bliss ,
indeed your lord is allah who created the heavens and the earth in six days , then in the manner befitting his majesty , ascended the throne ; he covers the night with the day , which hastily follows it , and made the sun and the moon and the stars subservient to his command ; pay heed ! only he has the power to create and command ; most auspiciousis allah , the lord of the creation .
your lord is the almighty , the most merciful .
from which you are turning away .
and assuredly we sent unto the thamud their brother saleh saying : worship allah . then lo ! they became two parties contending .
did younot think of those who went forth from their homes in thousands , fearing death ? allah said to them ,  die  . and then he restored them to life . truly , allah is full of bounty to mankind , but most men thank not .
and when allah saith : o jesus , son of mary ! didst thou say unto mankind : take me and my mother for two gods beside allah ? he saith : be glorified ! it was not mine to utter that to which i had no right . if i used to say it , then thou knewest it . thou knowest what is in my mind , and i know not what is in thy mind . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower of things hidden ?
but they killed her . so he said :  enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promisethat will not be belied . 
that is indeed an unfair division !
 only now ? when you had always been a rebel , and a wrongdoer .
on that day intercession shall not avail save of him whom the most compassionate lord permits , and whose word of intercession is pleasing to him .
bear with what they say , and remember our bondman david , lord of might , lo ! he was ever turning in repentance .
fight for the cause of god , those who fight you , but do not transgress , for god does not love the transgressors .
“ if we had some advice from the earlier generations , ” –
and press your hand to your side ; it will come out white , without a blemish—another sign .
and the people of moses made , after , from their ornaments a calf - an image having a lowing sound . did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them to a way ? they took it , and they were wrongdoers .
and who yet coveteth that shall increase .
you shall be divided into three parties ,
andthey tarried in their cave three hundred years and add nine .
if allah had not ordained banishment for them , he would have surely punished them in this world , and in the hereafter , there is the punishment of the fire for them .
o prophet ! keep thy duty to allah and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites . lo ! allah is knower , wise .
believers , when death approaches you , let two just men from among you act as witnesses when you make your testaments ; or two men from another tribe , if the calamity of death overtakes you while you are travelling in the land . detain them after prayers , and if you doubt their honesty , let them swear by god ,  we will not sell our testimony for any price , even to a kinsman . and we will not conceal the testimony of god . if we did , we would indeed be guilty of sin . 
is not allah enough for his servant ? but they try to frighten thee with otherbesides him ! for such as allah leaves to stray , there can be no guide .
those to whom we have given the scripture recognize it as they recognize theirsons . those who will lose themselvesdo not believe .
 and indeed we conferred a favour on thee another time .
they said , “ we shall never prefer you above the clear proofs that have come to us from the one who has created us – therefore carry out what you want to ; only in the life of this world will you be able to ! ”
therefore fear allah as much as you can , and listen , obey , and spend well for yourselves . and whosoever is saved from the greed of his own soul ; those are the winners .
we shall soon entrust to you a message heavy .
nay , thunder repeateth his praises , and so do the angels , with awe : he flingeth the loud-voiced thunder-bolts , and therewith he striketh whomsoever he will .. yet thesewhodispute about allah , with the strength of his power !
allah has revealed the best announcement , a book conformable in its various parts , repeating , whereat do shudder the skins of those who fear their lord , then their skins and their hearts become pliant to the remembrance of allah ; this is allah 's guidance , he guides with it whom he pleases ; andhim whom allah makes err , there is no guide for him .
he said ,  my lord , forgive me and my brother and admit us to your mercy . you are the most merciful of the merciful . 
god has promised those who believe and work righteousness : they will have forgiveness and a great reward .
 o our lord ! coverwith thy forgiveness - me , my parents , andbelievers , on the day that the reckoning will be established !
and they worship , beside allah , that which owneth them not any provision from the heavens and the earth , and they can not
indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter , coin the names of angels like those of females .
thus do we elaborate the signs , so that they may come back .
woe , then , to those who pray ,
recall , when shuayb said to them :  have you no fear ?
they rejected him , but we delivered him , and those with him , in the ark , and we made them inherit , while we overwhelmed in the flood those who rejected our signs . then see what was the end of those who were warned !
they said :  we give thee glad tidings in truth : be not then in despair ! 
and he drew forth his hand , and behold , it looked white to those who beheld it .
now surely they fold up their breasts that they may concealfrom him ; now surely , when they use their garments as a covering , he knows what they conceal and what they make public ; surely he knows what is in the breasts .
after i have created him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall you down , prostrating yourselves to him . ”
on the day of judgment they will certainly be lost .
and recall what time the angels said : o maryam ! verily allah chose thee and purified thee and chose thee above the women of the worlds .
then if ye find no one therein , enter not until leave hath been given you . and if it iaid unto you go back , then go back . it is cleaner for you , and allah is of that which ye work knower .
moses said , “ our lord , you have given pharaoh and his chiefs splendor and wealth in the worldly life . our lord , for them to lead away from your path . our lord , obliterate their wealth , and harden their hearts , they will not believe until they see the painful torment . ”
 we only feed you for the sake of god and we do not want any reward or thanks from you .
o prophet ! strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites , and be severe to them . hell shall be their abode ; what an evil destination !
he has attendant angels , before him and behind him , watching over him by god 's command . god changes not what is in a people , until they change what is in themselves . whensover god desires evil for a people , there is no turning it back ; apart from him , they have no protector .
indeed , had we not strengthened you , you might have inclined to them a little ,
with it he causes to grow for you the crops , the olives , the date-palms , the grapes , and every kind of fruit . verily ! in this is indeed an evident proof and a manifest sign for people who give thought .
so believe in god , his apostle and the light we have sent down . god is well aware of what you do .
so whoever wills may heed advice from it .
will have an easy reckoning ,
these are some tidings of the hidden which we divinely reveal to you ; and you were not with them when they set their task and when they were scheming .
and remember we took from the prophets their covenant : asfrom thee : from noah , abraham , moses , and jesus the son of mary : we took from them a solemn covenant :
indeed allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and allah watches what you do . ’
and laugh , and do not weep ?
and they tarried in the cave three hundred years , and to that they added nine more .
everyone shall taste the death . then unto us you shall be returned .
on the day when they will be heated in the fire of hell , then their foreheads , and their sides , and their backs will be branded with them : “ this is what you hoarded for yourselves ; so taste what you used to hoard . ”
neither human nor jinn will have touched them before .
have you not seen those who boast of their righteousness , even though it is allah who grants righteousness to whomsoever he wills ? they are not wronged even as much as the husk of a date-stone .
then after distress , he sent down upon you securitydrowsiness , overcoming a faction of you , while another faction worried about themselves , thinking of allah other than the truth - the thought of ignorance , saying ,  is there anything for usin this matter ?  say ,  indeed , the matter belongs completely to allah .  they conceal within themselves what they will not reveal to you . they say ,  if there was anything we could have done in the matter , some of us would not have been killed right here .  say ,  even if you had been inside your houses , those decreed to be killed would have come out to their death beds .  so that allah might test what is in your breasts and purify what is in your hearts . and allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
god has not instituted the rites of bahirah , sa'ibah , wasilah , nor of hami . it is the pagans who have attributed falsehood to god . many of them have no understanding .
thankful for his blessings . he chose him , and guided him to a straight path .
and thereafter we said to the children of israel : 'dwell in the land . when the promise of the everlasting life comes we shall bring you all together '
say , ‘ is there anyone among your partners who originates the creation and then brings it back ? ’ say , ‘ allah originates the creation , then he will bring it back. ’ then where do you stray ?
and made his progeny to endure ;
and he has subjected to you , as from him , all that is in the heavens and on earth : behold , in that are signs indeed for those who reflect .
i desire from them no provision , nor do i want them to feed me .
and erect huge palaces as though you will live for ever ,
believers , turn to god in repentance with the intention of never repeating the same sin . perhaps your lord will expiate your evil deeds and admit you to paradise wherein streams flow . on the day of judgment , god will not disgrace the prophet and those who have believed in him . their lights will shine in front of them and to their right . they will say ,  our lord , perfect our light for us and forgive our sins . you have power over all things  .
most surely you are at variance with each other in what you say ,
and make ready against them all you can of power , including steeds of warto threaten the enemy of allah and your enemy , and others besides whom , you may not know but whom allah does know . and whatever you shall spend in the cause of allah shall be repaid unto you , and you shall not be treated unjustly .
it is allah who has made the night for you , that ye may rest therein , and the days as that which helpsto see . verily allah is full of grace and bounty to men : yet most men give no thanks .
o you who believe ! when you meet a force , stand firm , and remember god much , so that you may prevail .
and they say ,  when will be this conquest , if you should be truthful ? 
and we shall set up the just balances for the resurrection day , so that not one soul shall be wronged anything ; even if it be the weight of one grain of mustard-seed we shall produce it , and sufficient are we for reckoners .
they replied : 'we will ask our father for him . this we will surely do '
then indeed only upon us is their reckoning .
'peace be on you ' hesaid , ' i shall call upon my lord to forgive you , for to me he has been gracious .
spend in the way of allah and do not cast into destruction with your own hands . be gooddoers ; allah loves the gooddoers .
and surely among you is he who would certainly hang back ! if then a misfortune befalls you he says : surely allah conferred a benefit on me that i was not present with them .
to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and earth . and allah is the witness of all things .
indeed what you are promised will surely come , and you will not be able to thwart it .
and do not go near fornication , as it is immoral and an evil way .
and thus will your lord choose you and teach you the interpretation of narratives and complete his favor upon you and upon the family of jacob , as he completed it upon your fathers before , abraham and isaac . indeed , your lord is knowing and wise . 
and there is none like unto him .
and it will be said to them , “ where are those you used to worship ? ”
such is the punishment of your lord when he seizes the towns in the midst of their sins : his punishing grip is terrible and severe .
and extend kindness and affection to those of the believers who follow you .
so when they roused our wrath , we took vengeance on them and drowned them all .
when they said , 'surely joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we , though we are a band . surely our father is in manifest error .
when he fled on the laden ship ,
o ye who believe ! stand out firmly for justice , as witnesses to allah , even as against yourselves , or your parents , or your kin , and whether it berich or poor : for allah can best protect both . follow not the lusts , lest ye swerve , and if ye distortor decline to do justice , verily allah is well-acquainted with all that ye do .
after this the pharaoh withdrew and settled his stratagem , then came back .
they ask you , , about the hour : when is its arrival ?
this is the glad news which god gives to his servants , the righteously striving believers . , say ,  i do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to you exceptlove ofrelatives .  whoever achieves virtue will have its merit increased . god is all-forgiving and appreciating .
on the day when the unbelievers will be brought within sight of the fire , they will be asked : “ is this not the truth ? ” and they will answer “ yes , by our lord . ” allah will say : “ then suffer the chastisement as a requital for your disbelieving . ”
you will find others desiring to be secure from you , and secure from their own people ; yet whenever they are called back to polytheism , they relapse into it . so if they do not keep out of your way , nor offer you peace , nor keep their hands off , then seize them and kill them wherever you confront them , and it is such against whom we have given you a clear sanction .
as hospitality from one all-forgiving , one all-compassionate . '
in the past we granted to moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and a message for those who would do right , -
and we have enjoined upon man goodness to parents . but if they endeavor to make you associate with me that of which you have no knowledge , do not obey them . to me is your return , and i will inform you about what you used to do .
verily what is on earth we shall make but as dust and dry soil .
knows he not that when the contents of the graves are brought out and poured forth .
andan announcement from allah and his messenger to the people on the day of the greater pilgrimage that allah is disassociated from the disbelievers , andhis messenger . so if you repent , that is best for you ; but if you turn away - then know that you will not cause failure to allah . and give tidings to those who disbelieve of a painful punishment .
in both of them are two pairs of every fruit .
 or the water of the garden will run off underground so that thou wilt never be able to find it . 
bring it back , if you should be truthful ?
yet why should god not punish them , when they are turning others away from the sacred mosque , although they are not its custodians ? its rightful custodians are the pious ; but most of them do not know .
allah has promised the hypocrites , both men and women , and the unbelievers the fire of gehenna . they shall live in it for ever . it is sufficient for them . allah has cursed them and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is notfor the prophet and those who believe to ask allah 's forgiveness for the mushrikuneven though they be of kin , after it has become clear to them that they are the dwellers of the fire .
and the reward of the hereafter is surely better for those who have faith and are godwary .
it is only those who listen , will respond , but as for the dead , allah will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
bending his neck , that he may lead astray from the way of allah ; his shall be humiliation in the world , and we shall make him taste on the day of judgment the torment of burning .
“ we shall then have fabricated a lie against allah if we return to your religion after allah has rescued us from it ; and it is not for any of us muslims to return to your religion except if allah , who is our lord , wills ; the knowledge of our lord encompasses all things ; in allah only we have trusted ; our lord ! decide with justice between us and our people – and yours is the best decision . ”
how numerous are the peoples we destroyed before them - those that were more resourceful and grander in outward appearance !
and the evil deeds that they have done shall appear to them , and they shall be encompassed by that they mocked at .
he calleth upon him whose hurt is nearer than his profit : surely ill the patron ! ill the comrade !
so bear with patience until the judgement of your lord comes , and do not belike the man in the fishwho called out , choking with grief :
yet , when they see a sign theyturn their backs and say ,  the same old sorcery ! 
verily , he who has given youthe quranwill surely bring you back to the ma'ad . say :  my lord is aware of him who brings guidance , and he who is in manifest error . 
they will burn , in hell , an evil resting place --
which of the powers of your lord , will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and we rescued him and lotto the land which we have blessed forpeoples .
say thou : bethink ye , if his torment come on you by night or by day which portion thereof would the culprlts hasten on ?
those who deny allah and his messengers , andwish to separate allah from his messengers , saying :  we believe in some but reject others  : andwish to take a course midway , -
why should it seem strange to mankind that we sent revelations to a mortal among them , who would warn others and give to the believers the glad news of their high rank in the sight of god . the unbelievers have said ,  heis certainly a magician . 
say : ' o my people , act according to your station ; i am acting . and assuredly you will know who shall possess the abode ultimate . surely the evildoers will not prosper . '
in them are fruits , and date-palms , and pomegranates .
put your hand under your armpit : it will come outwhite , without any blemish . this shall be another sign .
or you may say , “ it is our ancestors who first ascribed partnersand we werechildren after them ; so will you destroy us on account of the deeds of the followers of falsehood ? ”
whoever should desire the immediate - we hasten for him from it what we will to whom we intend . then we have made for him hell , which he willburn , censured and banished .
until , when he reached between the two barriers , he found this side of them a people scarcely able to understand speech .
and we delay it only for a termfixed .
certainly your lord will decide between them in his wisdom , he is the almighty , the all knowing ,
then he causes him to die , then assigns to him a grave ,
greedy therewithal , intrusive .
allah doth admonish you , that ye may never repeat such , if ye arebelievers .
we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
and food that chokes and a painful punishment -
and the punishment seized them . surely , in that there is a sign . yet most of them do not believe .
, turn your face singlemindedly to the true faith and adhere to the true nature on which allah has created human beings . the mould fashioned by allah can not be altered . that is the true , straight faith , although most people do not know .
in their hearts is sickness , and god has increased their sickness . they will have a painful punishment because of their denial .
they said ,  call upon your lord for us to make plain to us what it is . verily to us all cows are alike , and surely , if allah wills , we will be guided . 
we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his nobles . he said ,  i am the messenger of the lord of the universe , 
there is none that can ward it off .
those they call upon are themselves seeking the means to come to their lord , which of them shall be nearer ; they hope for his mercy , and fear his chastisement . surely thy lord 's chastisement is a thing to beware of .
“ he nearly led us away from our gods , had we not patiently adhered to them. ” but they will know , when they witness the torment , who is further away from the way .
hast thou not seen how that whatsoever is in the heavens and in the earth extols god , and the birds spreading their wings ? each -- he knows its prayer and its extolling ; and god knows the things they do .
and amassed wealth and hoarded it .
like pharaoh 's people and those before them who belied our revelations ; allah seized them in their sinfulness . allah is firm in inflicting punishment .
and the earth shall beam with the light of its lord , and the book shall be laid down , and the prophets and the witnesses shall be brought up , and judgment shall be given between them with justice , and they shall not be dealt with unjustly .
and we have protected it from every devil expelled
indeed he knows whatever is spoken aloud , and he knows whatever you conceal .
 at length will be said to the wrong-doers : 'taste ye the enduring punishment ! ye get but the recompense of what ye earned ! ' 
then contemplatethe memorials of allah 's mercy ! - how he gives life to the earth after its death : verily the same will give life to the men who are dead : for he has power over all things .
they said : 'what shall be the recompense , if you prove to be lying '
allah ! la ilahla illa huwa ! to him belong the best names .
will you kill yourself for grief of them if they do not believe in this presentation ?
gardens everlasting ; they shall enter them , and also whosoever shall have acted righteously from among their fathers and their spouses and their progeny . and angels shall enter unto them from every portal , saying :
their noble messengers said to them , “ we are indeed human beings like you , but allah bestows favour upon whomever he wills , among his bondmen * ; it is not our task to bring any proof to you except by the command of allah ; and only upon allah must the muslims rely . ”
we mete out death among you , and we are not to be outrun ,
“ o moosa , i am indeed , in truth , allah the almighty , the wise . ”
do not treat her unkindly or the punishment of a grievous day will fall on you . 
surely , hell will be their refuge .
and leave me alone to deal with the beliers , and those who are in possession of good things of life . and give them respite for a little while .
and those that believe , and do deeds of righteousness -- those are the inhabitants of paradise ; there they shall dwell forever . '
we are eager for our lord to forgive us our sins , since we are the first of the believers . ”
on the day when he will call to them – he will therefore proclaim , “ where are those partners of mine , whom you had assumed ? ”
so what is the matter with them that they turn away from the advice ?
we shall pardon the sinful deeds of those who believe and do the right , and give them a reward better than their deeds .
when those who disbelieve had put in their hearts a zeal , the zeal of paganism , then allah sent down his tranquillity upon his apostle and upon the believers , and kept them fixed on the way of piety , and they were worthy thereof and meet therefor ; and allah is of everything ever knower .
and the bookwill be placed ; and thou wilt see the sinful in great terror because of what istherein ; they will say ,  ah ! woe to us ! what a book is this ! it leaves out nothing small or great , but takes account thereof !  they will find all that they did , placed before them : and not one will thy lord treat with injustice .
he makes whom he pleases to enter into his mercy ; andthe unjust , he has prepared for them a painful chastisement .
and similar torments of diverse kinds .
the egyptian who bought him said to his wife , “ take good care of him ; he may be useful to us , or we may adopt him as a son. ” we thus established joseph in the land , to teach him the interpretation of events . god has control over his affairs , but most people do not know .
“ peace be upon you , because you endured patiently . how excellent is the final home . ”
moses said ,  lord , grant me courage .
bestowed the qur'an ,
so , could one who creates be like one who can not ? will you not then contemplate ?
and was good to his parents and not forceful , nor disobedient .
and nothing prevents their contributions from being accepted from them except that they disbelieved in allah and in his messenger ; and that they came not to as-salatexcept in a lazy state ; and that they offer not contributions but unwillingly .
except with their spouses and slave-girls . the practice of carnal relations is lawful with them .
that thou mayest warn a people whose fathers were never warned , so they are heedless .
all that is in the heavens and the earth glorify god . he is majestic and all-wise .
i will surely fill hell with you and those of them that follow you all together . 
and we bestowed favour upon zechariah , when he cried to his lord :  lord ! leave me not solitary . you are the best inheritor . 
see ye not how allah hath made serviceable unto you whatsoever is in the skies and whatsoever is in the earth and hath loaded you with his favours both without and within ? yet of mankind is he who disputeth concerning allah , without knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving light .
and abraham enjoined his sons to do the same , as did jacob ,  my sons , god has chosen this religion for you ; so do not let death overtake you , except when you are in a state of submission . 
and the foremost ones are the foremost ones :
remember the favours he bestowed on you , and the covenant he cemented with you , when you said :  we have heard and obey .  have fear of god , for he knows the secrets of your heart .
they will go round and around between it and boiling water .
if you are steadfast and mindful of god , even though the enemy should suddenly fall upon you , your lord will help you even with five thousand marked angels .
and that my chastisement is the painful chastisement .
said :  i am not one to prostrate myself to man , whom thou didst create from sounding clay , from mud moulded into shape . 
the abode will be hell-fire ;
but if they turn away , indeed allah knows best the agents of corruption .
say : the truth hath come , and falsehood showeth not its face and will not return .
in them will be fruits , and dates and pomegranates :
“ you and your brother , both go with my signs , and do not slacken in my remembrance . ”
and when jesus , son of mary , said :  o children of israel , i am sent to you by god to confirm the torahbefore me , and to give you good tidings of an apostle who will come after me , whose name is ahmad .  yet when he has come to them with clear proofs , they say :  this is only magic . 
lo ! that wherewith ye are threatened is indeed true ,
have ye seen that which ye emit ?
who wants to drive you out of your land by his magic . tell us , what do you advise us ? 
the masih , son of maryam , was naught but an apostle ; surely there passed away apostles before him and his mother was a saintly woman ; both of them were wont to eat food . behold ! how we expound unto them the evidences ! then behold ! whither they are deviating !
and they came to their father at night , weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that over which you used to differ . 
degrade me not upon the day when they are raised up ,
on the right and on the left , in groups ?
noah said : 'my people ! if i base myself on a clear evidence from my lord , and i have also been blessed by his mercy to which you have been blind , how can we force it upon you despite your aversion to it ?
i swear by all that you can see ,
that he may make what satan has thrown in a test for those in whose hearts is a sickness and those whose hearts have hardened . indeed the wrongdoers are steeped in extreme defiance .
then in the scorch roast him
is he who was deadand we gave him lifeand set for him a lightwhereby he can walk amongst men , like him who is in the darknessfrom which he can never come out ? thus it is made fair-seeming to the disbelievers that which they used to do .
who honor their trust and promises ,
and for you there is beauty in them as ye drive them at eventide and as ye drive them out to pasture .
but allah knows your enemies better , and allah suffices as guardian , and allah suffices as helper .
when they sat by it
o yusuf ! turn aside from this ; and ! ask forgiveness for your fault , surely you are one of the wrong-doers .
it is allah who created you in a state of weakness ; then after weakness he gave you strength , then after strength he made you weak and old . he creates what he pleases . he is all-knowing , all-powerful .
while we behold it nigh :
save from their wives and what their right hands own then being not blameworthy
except before their mates or those whom their right hands possess , for they surely are not blameable ,
do not set up another god besides allah . indeed i am from him a manifest warner to you . ’
and the book shall be placed , then you will see the guilty fearing from what is in it , and they will say : ah ! woe to us ! what a book is this ! it does not omit a small one nor a great one , but numbers them ; and what they had done they shall find present ; and your lord does not deal unjustly with anyone .
but what could tell you that per chance he might become pure ?
the unbelievers say , 'why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his lord ? ' say : 'god leads astray whomsoever he will , and he guides to him all who are penitent . '
those who came after them say : 'forgive us our lord , and forgive our brothers who were believers before us . do not put in our hearts any spite towards those who believe . lord , you are the gentle , the most merciful '
 if we had had with us a book like that of the people of old ,
those who disbelieve among the people of the scripture , and the polytheists , will be in the fire of hell , where they will abide forever . these are the worst of creatures .
so we made this punishment an example to their own and to succeeding generations and a lesson to those who are al-muttaqun .
stretch not thine eyes to that we have given pairs of them to enjoy ; and do not sorrow for them , and lower thy wing unto the believers ,
a day when ye will turn to flee , having no preserver from allah : and he whom allah sendeth astray , for him there is no guide .
indeed , we have created all things according to a measure .
and proclaim , “ all praise is to allah – he will soon show you his signs so you will recognise them ” ; andyour lord is not unaware of what you , o people , do . ”
so , whoever does an atom 's weight of good shall see it ;
and if they dispute with thee , say thou : allah knoweth best that which ye work .
believers , remember the blessings which god bestowed upon you when a certain people were about to lay hands on you and he held back their hands from you . have fear of god and in god let the believers place their trust .
hastening towards the caller , the disbelievers will say :  this is a hard day . 
and the day when the unjust will gnaw his hands , saying , “ alas , if only i had chosen a way along with themessenger ! ”
yes indeed , man is surely rebellious .
and they believed , whrefore we let them enjoy life for a season .
no ! i swear by the day of resurrection ,
and they sold him for a small price , a few pieces of silver , and they showed no desire for him .
allah said : then get thee forth therefrom ; verily thou art one damned .
 then will ye truly , - o ye that go wrong , and treatas falsehood ! -
and un to those who are judaised we disallowed that which we have already recounted unto thee ; and we wronged them not , but themselves they were wont to wrong .
then hymn the praises of thy lord , and seek forgiveness of him . lo ! he is ever ready to show mercy .
and we shall indeed make them taste the smaller punishment before the greater punishment , so that they may return .
what befell you , when the two armies confronted each other , was by the permission of god so that he would know who were the true believers
when lot , their brother , said to them , ‘ will you not be wary ?
man asks ,  when i am once dead , shall i be raised to life ? 
he has counted them and numbered them precisely ,
moses threw his staff and suddenly it became a serpent .
and slay them wherever ye find them , and drive them out of the places whence they drove you out , for persecution is worse than slaughter . and fight not with them at the inviolable place of worship until they first attack you there , but if they attack youthen slay them . such is the reward of disbelievers .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and allah suffices as trustee .
behold how they fabricate a lie against allah ! and sufficeth that as a manifest sin .
obey allah and obey the apostle , and beware ; but if ye turn away , then know that upon our apostle resteth only the plain preaching .
a lie -- gods besides allah -- do you desire ?
they said , “ we will not prefer you to the proofs that have come to us , and him who created us . so issue whatever judgment you wish to issue . you can only rule in this lowly life .
you will not find the people who believe in allah and the last day , befriending those who oppose allah and his noble messenger , even if they are their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their tribesmen ; it is these upon whose hearts allah has ingrained faith , and has aided them with a spirit from himself ; and he will admit them into gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding in them forever ; allah is pleased with them , and they are pleased with him ; this is allah ’ s group ; pay heed ! indeed it is allah ’ s group who are the successful .
indeed we unleashed upon them an icy gale on an incessantly ill-fated day ,
we commanded john , zachariah 's son , to follow the guidance of the lord with due steadfastness . to john we gave knowledge and wisdom to john during his childhood .
then we set you on a clear path : so follow it , and do not yield to the desires of those who have no knowledge .
and do not make allah a target of your oaths , by pledging against being virtuous and pious , and against making peace among mankind ; and allah is all hearing , all knowing .
so god said :  descend . you have no right to be insolent here . go , and away ; you are one of the damned . 
therefore , by your lord , we shall question every one of them .
and we have undoubtedly kept a part of it as a clear sign for people of intellect .
this will be in order that he may manifest unto them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieved should come to know that they had been liars .
what ! do they , in whose hearts is a disease , fancy that allah will not expose concealed enmities ?
indeed we gave him authority in the land and bestowed him the means of everything .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe ,  if it hadbeen good , they would not have preceded us to it .  and when they are not guided by it , they will say ,  this is an ancient falsehood . 
they left how many gardens and fountains ,
nor drive away the one who asks .
lest you say :  the book that was sent before was meant only for two groups ; we were not aware of their teachings ; 
we pour down plenteous water ,
or him who came upon a township as it lay fallen on its trellises . he said , ‘ how will allah revive this after its death ? ! ’ so allah made him die for a hundred years , then he resurrected him . he said , ‘ how long did you remain ? ’ said he , ‘ i have remained a day or part of a day. ’ he said , ‘ no , you have remained a hundred years . now look at your food and drink which have not rotted ! then look at your ass ! that we may make you a sign for mankind . and now look at its bones , how we raise them up and clothe them with flesh ! ’ when it became evident to him , he said , ‘ i know that allah has power over all things . ’
and by morning it lay as if it had already been harvested , a barren land .
they question theeconcerning menstruation . say : it is an illness , so let women alone at such times and go not in unto them till they are cleansed . and when they have purified themselves , then go in unto them as allah hath enjoined upon you . truly allah loveth those who turn unto him , and loveth those who have a care for cleanness .
neither his wealth availed him , nor what he had earned .
thereupon his lord answered him , and diverted their scheming away from him . he is the hearer , the knower .
it was he who totally destroyed the former 'ad
and the king said : bring him to me , i will choose him for myself . so when he had spoken with him , he said : surely you are in our presence today an honorable , a faithful one .
yet anyone who does evil or wrongs his own soul and then asks god for forgiveness will find god forgiving and merciful .
but when the sight is dazed
o prophet , say to whoever is in your hands of the captives ,  if allah knowsgood in your hearts , he will give youbetter than what was taken from you , and he will forgive you ; and allah is forgiving and merciful . 
and who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against allah , or says : it has been revealed to me ; while nothing has been revealed to him , and he who says : i can reveal the like of what allah has revealed ? and if you had seen when the unjust shall be in the agonies of death and the angels shall spread forth their hands : give up your souls ; today shall you be recompensed with an ignominious chastisement because you spoke against allah other than the truth andyou showed pride against his communications .
to firon and his chiefs , but they behaved haughtily and they were an insolent people .
indeed we shall help our apostles and those who have faith in the life of the world and on the day when the witnesses rise up ,
avoid vain talk ,
,  this is our gift , so grant or withhold without account . 
those who endured patiently and upon their lord relied .
we did not create in sport the heavens and the earth and all that lies between the two .
bring me blocks of iron ; until when he had filled up the space between the two mountain sides , he said : blow , until when he had made itfire , he said : bring me molten brass which i may pour over it .
the revelation of the book is from allah the exalted in power , full of wisdom .
 why then are not golden bracelets bestowed on him , or angels sent along with him ? 
who remember- allah standing and sitting and lying on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : our lord thou createdest not all this in vain . hallowed be thou ! save us , thou , from the torment of the fire !
o prophet , when believing women come to you and swear loyalty to you upon the condition that they will not associate anything with allah , and will notsteal , nor commit adultery , nor slay their children , nor fabricate slander between their hands and their feet , nor disobey you in any honorable thing , supplicate to allah for forgiveness for them , allah is the forgiving and the most merciful .
most surely there is a sign in this for him who fears the chastisement of the hereafter ; this is a day on which the people shall be gathered together and this is a day that shall be witnessed .
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs – for them will be a disgraceful punishment .
for the beggar and the deprived ,
verily , those who disbelieved in the reminderwhen it came to them . and verily , it is an honourable respected book .
moses prayed :  our lord ! thou hast indeed bestowed on pharaoh and his chiefs splendour and wealth in the life of the present , and so , our lord , they misleadfrom thy path . deface , our lord , the features of their wealth , and send hardness to their hearts , so they will not believe until they see the grievous penalty . 
it is the piercing star -
but today you do not hold for one anotherbenefit or harm , and we will say to those who wronged ,  taste the punishment of the fire , which you used to deny . 
then we shall save our messengers and the believers . it is our obligated duty , we shall save those who believe .
gardens and vineyards
who represented the quran as magic .
by the moon when it follows the sun ,
this quran guides to what is most upright ; and it gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that they will have a great reward .
and those who accept the truth of the judgment day
can the one who follows the authority of his lord be considered equal to the one whose evil deeds are made to seem attractive to him and who follows his own desires ?
we will set up the scales of justice for the day of resurrection , so that no soul will suffer the least injustice . and even if it be the weight of a mustard-seed , we will bring it up . sufficient are we as reckoners .
surely it is we who give life and cause death , and to us shall all return
and when the heaven will be rent in sunder and will become rosy like unto red hide .
o you who believe ! do not put questions about things which if declared to you may trouble you , and if you question about them when the quran is being revealed , they shall be declared to you ; allah pardons this , and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
this is because they prefer the life of this world to the hereafter and because god does not guide those who deny the truth .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , high exalted be he above that they associate .
the lord said to moses ,  i have given you distinction above the people by speaking to you and giving you my message . receive what i have given to you and give us thanks . 
and when your lord proclaimed that he would surely send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict on them a terrible punishment . indeed your lord is swift in retribution , and indeed , he is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
he who knows that the book which has been sent to you from your lord is the truth , is he like him who is blind to that truth ? it is only people of understanding who take heed :
allah to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ! and woe unto the disbelievers from a severe torment .
and there is none of the people of the scripture , but must believe in him , son of maryam , as only a messenger of allah and a human being ] , before hisor a jew 's or a christian 's ] death . and on the day of resurrection , he ] will be a witness against them .
it is no one but satan who frightens you with his allies . but do not fear him , fear me , if indeed you are believers .
but if they cry lies to thee , lies were cried to messengers before thee , who came bearing clear signs , and the psalms , and the book illuminating .
and it shall call him who withdrew and turned his back
if he asked you for them , and presses you , you would be mean and he would expose your anger .
nor will it be permitted for them to make an excuse .
we have created seven ways above you ; of our creation , we are never inattentive .
believers , why is it that when you are told to march for the cause of god , you seem to linger at home . have you given preference to the worldly life over the life hereafter ? the worldly gains compared to those of the next life are but very little .
nigh which is the garden of the refuge ,
let the human being think abouthis food .
and verily we make them taste the lower punishment before the greater , that haply they may return .
god has not assigned to any man two hearts within his breast ; nor has he made your wives , when you divorce , saying , 'be as my mother 's back , ' truly your mothers , neither has he made your adopted sons your sons in fact . that is your own saying , the words of your mouths ; but god speaks the truth , and guides on the way .
those who say : 'our lord is allah ' and follow the straight path shall have nothing to fear nor shall they sorrow .
and she said to his sister , 'follow him , ' and she perceived him from afar , even while they were not aware .
the day when allah will raise all of them together and inform them of their misdeeds ; allah has kept count of them , whereas they have forgotten them ; and all things are present before allah .
if they had believed in god and the prophet and what had been revealed to him , they would never have held them as allies ; and many among them are transgressors .
that which you have been given is but the enjoyment of the present life . better and more enduring is that which allah has for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
 and i am commandedin order that i may be the first of those who submit themselves to allahas muslims . 
then when the promise for the first of the two came , we raised against you bondmen of ours endued with exceeding violence , so they entered the dwellings ; and it was a promise fulfilled .
they shall say , 'they have gone astray from us ; nay , but it was nothing at all that we called upon aforetime . ' even so god leads astray the unbelievers .
and some of them have made covenant with god : 'if he gives us of his bounty , we will make offerings and be of the righteous . '
upon whom allah has laid his curse . he said : ' i will take to myself an appointed portion of your servants
god , there is no god but he , the living , the eternal .
turning back they asked :  what have you lost ? 
do not take oaths to deceive each other , lest your foot should slip after its firmness , lest you should taste evil , for you barred others from the path of allah , and lest a mighty punishment awaits you .
again turn thy vision a second time : vision will come back to thee dull and discomfited , in a state worn out .
an efreetamong the jinn replied : ' i will bring it to you before you rise from your place ; i have the strength and am trustworthy '
and in whatsoever ye differ , the verdict therein belongeth to allah . such is my lord , in whom i put my trust , and unto whom i turn .
these are the people who , in the world to come , shall have nothing but hellfire and all that they used to do shall be in vain .
have they not heard the news of those who have gone before them ? the news of the nations of noah , aad and thamood , of abraham 's nation , and the people of midian and the ruined cities ? their messengers showed them clear signs . allah did not harm them , but they harmed themselves .
and the mountains scattered ,
‘ you make the night pass into the day and you make the day pass into the night . you bring forth the living from the dead and you bring forth the dead from the living , and you provide for whomever you wish without any reckoning . ’
thamood and aad denied the catastrophe .
but those who believe and work deeds of righteousness - to them shall we give a home in heaven , - lofty mansions beneath which flow rivers , - to dwell therein for aye ; - an excellent reward for those who do ! -
he replied ,  did you see when we were resting by the rock , that i forgot the fish ? satan made me forget it , so i did not mention it . it made its way to the sea in a miraculous way ! 
then one of the two women approached him , walking bashfully . she said , ‘ indeed my father invites you to pay you the wages for wateringfor us. ’ so when he came to him and recounted the story to him , he said , ‘ do not be afraid . you have been delivered from the wrongdoing lot . ’
so fight in the way of allah : you are responsible only for yourself , but urge on the faithful . maybe allah will curb the might of the faithless , for allah is greatest in might and severest in punishment .
he said , 'this is naught but a trumped-up sorcery ;
and accepts the best ,
not before long the hoopoe came up and said :  i have obtained a knowledge which you could not . i have brought for you sure news about sheba .
endure thou patiently . thine endurance is only byallah . grieve not for them , and be not in distress because of that which they devise .
he said : 'moses , cast it down '
in a nearer land ; and they , after the overcoming of them , shall soon overcome .
thou wilt recognise in their faces the beaming brightness of bliss .
they said : 'have you come to turn us away from that which we found our fathers practicingthe domination of the land might belong to you two ? we do not believe you '
and , mary , 'imran 's daughter , who guarded her chastity so we breathed into her of our spirit ; and she put her trust in the words of her lord andhis books , and was among the devout .
but they say the like of what the ancients said .
his people had no answer except saying :  expel the family of lot from your city . they are a people who wouldbe pure ! 
and by the earth ever bursting with verdure ,
he hath taught him utterance .
from the evil of the slinking whisperer .
and that we would never knew what our records contained .
surely , god loves those who fight for his cause in ranks , as if they were a solid cemented structure .
nay , they will come to know !
but those who were proud will reply : 'all of us are in it . allah has judged between his worshipers '
whosoever intercedes for a good cause will have the reward thereof , and whosoever intercedes for an evil cause will have a share in its burden . and allah is ever all-able to doeverything .
:  our lord ! let not our hearts deviateafter you have guided us , and grant us mercy from you . truly , you are the bestower . 
but my call has only increased them in running away .
and those who believe will say : are those they who swear by allah say their solemn oaths that they were verily with you ? their works came to naught , and they found themselves losers .
and call not those who are slain in the way of allah  dead .  nay , they are living , only ye perceive not .
to admit the believers , both men and women , to gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they shall abide , and to efface their evil deeds from them . that , in allah 's sight , is the supreme triumph .
to god belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth , and to god all events are referred .
he it is who hath placed you as viceroys of the earth and hath exalted some of you in rank above others , that he may try you bythat which he hath given you . lo ! thy lord is swift in prosecution , and lo ! he verily is forgiving , merciful .
yet we delivered him , and those who were in the ship , and appointed it for a sign unto all beings .
and i am commanded to be the first muslim  .
has taught man that which he knew not .
should you retaliate , retaliate with the like of what you have been made to suffer , but if you are patient that is surely better for the steadfast .
they swear by god that they did not , yet they uttered the words of denial of truth after they had accepted islam . they meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out , and being spiteful was their only response to god , who had enriched them out of his bounty , and to his messenger . if they repent , it will indeed be better for them . if they turn away , god will punish them with grievous suffering in this world and the hereafter , and there will be no one on earth to protect or help them .
and then when our decree came to pass , we delivered hud and these who believed with him by a mercy from us ; and we delivered them : from a torment rough .
when it is said to them :  come to what allah hath revealed ; come to the messenger  : they say :  enough for us are the ways we found our fathers following .  what ! even though their fathers were void of knowledge and guidance ?
surely he is able to bring him back
and taught him clear expression .
“ our lord , you know what we conceal and what we reveal . and nothing is hidden from god , on earth or in the heaven . ”
believers , do not take outsiders as your intimate friends , they will spare no effort to harm you . they love to see you suffer ; their hatred is evident from the words which fall from their mouths . but what their hearts conceal is far worse . we have made our signs clear to you ; will you not understand ?
and when the groups came face to face , the companions of moses cried out :  we are overtaken ! 
that , and whoever honors the sacred ordinances of allah - it is best for him in the sight of his lord . and permitted to you are the grazing livestock , except what is recited to you . so avoid the uncleanliness of idols and avoid false statement ,
i desire no provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
then he turned his back to them , and said :  o my grief for joseph !  his eyes whitened with grief and he was choked up with sorrow trying to suppress his grief .
if they endure patiently , the fire will be their residence ; and if they make up excuses , they will not be pardoned .
so , when their messengers brought them the clear signs , they rejoiced in what knowledge they had , and were encompassed by that they mocked at .
god : there is no deity save him , the living , the eternal one . neither slumber nor sleep overtakes him . to him belong whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on the earth . who can intercede with him except by his permission ? he knows all that is before them and all that is behind them . they can grasp only that part of his knowledge which he wills . his throne extends over the heavens and the earth ; and their upholding does not weary him . he is the sublime , the almighty one !
and the trumpet blast will sound : it would be the day of doom .
and he is allah there is no god but he ! his is all praise in the first and in the last , and his is the command , and unto him ye shall be returned .
and verily , that is indeed a great oath , if you but know .
and is not to be taken lightly .
and others have shattered their works into pieces among themselves ; all have to return to us .
then what is wrong with themthat they turn away fromadmonition ?
o you who believe ! stand out firmly for allah and be just witnesses and let not the enmity and hatred of others make you avoid justice . be just : that is nearer to piety , and fear allah . verily , allah is well-acquainted with what you do .
go with this shirt of mine and cast it upon my father 's face ; he shall become clear-sighted ; and bring unto me all your household .
they said : swear one to anot her by god that we shall surely fall upon him and his household by night and thereafter we shall surely say unto his heir ; we witnessed not the destruction of his household , and verily we are truthtellers .
you shall certainly travel from stage to stage .
and when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded , we rescued those who forbade wrong , and visited those who did wrong with dreadful punishment because they were evil-livers .
they said , 'and what shall be its recompense if you are liars ? '
they said : by allah , thou wilt never cease remembering joseph till thy health is ruined or thou art of those who perish !
irritablewhen evil touches him ;
those who deny allah ’ s signs and kill the prophets unjustly and kill those who call for justice from among the people , inform them of a painful punishment .
did we not create you from a base fluid
and hell will be revealed for the astray .
and who will be told ,  this is what you had called a lie  .
they have certainly received the kind of news in which there is a lesson and strong words of wisdom ,
and he taught adam all the names , then showed them to the angels , saying : inform me of the names of these , if ye are truthful .
you will never be able to treat your wives with equal fairness , however much you may desire to do so , but do not ignore one wife altogether , leaving her suspended . and if you make amends and act righteously , surely god is most forgiving and merciful .
and its mixture is of tasneem ,
one of the two women said , ‘ father , hire him . indeed the best you can hire is a powerful and trustworthy man . ’
the day when the people will be like scattered moths .
and their brethren increase them in error , then they cease not .
saying : throw him into the ark , and throw it into the river , then the river shall throw it on to the bank , and there an enemy to me and an enemy to him shall take him . and i endued thee with love from me that thou mightest be trained according to my will ,
muhammadis no more than a messenger , and indeedmessengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you then turn back on your heels ? and he who turns back on his heels , not the least harm will he do to allah , and allah will give reward to those who are grateful .
yea ! we are able to make complete his very fingertips
and they used to say ,  when we die and become dust and bones , are we indeed to be resurrected ?
and they will cry out therein ,  our lord , remove us ; we will do righteousness - other than what we were doing !  but did we not grant you life enough for whoever would remember therein to remember , and the warner had come to you ? so taste , for there is not for the wrongdoers any helper .
has not the story reached them of those before them ? - the people of nuh , 'ad , and thamud , the people of ibrahim , the dwellers of madyanand the cities overthrownpreached ] , to them came their messengers with clear proofs . so it was not allah who wronged them , but they used to wrong themselves .
then came joseph 's brethren : they entered his presence , and he knew them , but they knew him not .
nay ! by the moon .
if you keep avoiding the cardinal sins that are forbidden to you , we will forgive you your othersins and admit you into a noble place .
allah enhances in guidance those who areguided , and lasting righteous deeds are better with your lord in reward , and better at the return .
indeed those who are faithful and those who have migrated and waged jihad in the way of allah—it is they who expect allah ’ s mercy , and allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
they say : what ! when we are dead and become dust and bones , shall we then be raised ?
am i not better than this wretch who can not even speak clearly ?
we found most of them untrue to their covenants , indeed we found most of them to be defiant .
say :  i am on clear proof from my lord , but you deny . i have not gotten what you are asking for impatiently . the decision is only for allah , he declares the truth , and he is the best of judges . 
or he may destroy them because of that which they have earned , and he may pardon many of them .
or a destitute in the dust .
the best among them said : 'did i not say to you to exalt '
we verily sentbefore thee among the factions of the men of old .
and warn them of the day of impending calamity , when hearts will rise up to the throats filled with grief ; and the disbelievers will have neither any friend nor any intercessor who will be obeyed .
when the girl , buried alive , is asked :
and i said ,  ask you forgiveness of your lord ; surely he is ever all-forgiving ,
and follow that which is inspired in thee from thy lord . lo ! allah is aware of what ye do .
so if you have any plot to devise against me , then devise it .
when talut set forth with the armies , he said :  allah will test you at the stream : if any drinks of its water , he goes not with my army : only those who taste not of it go with me : a mere sip out of the hand is excused .  but they all drank of it , except a few . when they crossed the river , - he and the faithful ones with him , - they said :  this day we can not cope with goliath and his forces .  but those who were convinced that they must meet allah , said :  how oft , by allah 's will , hath a small force vanquished a big one ? allah is with those who steadfastly persevere . 
but their brothers - the devils increase them in error ; then they do not stop short .
as did the people of 'ad and pharaoh and the brethren of lot ,
and similarly we awakened them so that they may enquire about each other ; a speaker among them said , “ how long have you stayed here ? ” some among them said , “ we have stayed a day or part of a day ” ; the others said , “ your lord well knows how long you have stayed ; therefore send one of you to the city with this silver coin – he may then check which food available there is purer , in order to bring some of it for you to eat – and he must be courteous and not inform anyone about you . ”
but when our signs came to them , that should have opened their eyes , they said :  this is sorcery manifest ! 
while you are indulging in varieties .
and the first forerunnersamong the muhajireen and the ansar and those who followed them with good conduct - allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with him , and he has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide forever . that is the great attainment .
said he , 'noah , he is not of thy family ; it is a deed not righteous . do not ask of me that whereof thou hast no knowledge . i admonish thee , lest thou shouldst be among the ignorant . '
and thus we established joseph in the land to settle therein wherever he willed . we touch with our mercy whom we will , and we do not allow to be lost the reward of those who do good .
when the human being is afflicted with hardship , he cries out to us for help . when we grant him a favor , he says ,  i knew that i deserved it .  in fact , it is only a test for him , but most people do not know this .
ask forgiveness for them , or ask not forgiveness for them ; though thou ask forgiveness for them seventy times allah will not forgive them . that is because they disbelieved in allah and his messenger , and allah guideth not wrongdoing folk .
then he attacked them , striking forcefully .
say , “ what is your opinion – if allah makes it day continuously for you till the day of resurrection then , other than allah , who is the god who could bring you night for you to rest during it ? so do you not perceive ? ”
o man ! what has deceived you about your generous lord ,
your lord has neither left you , nor despises you .
it was said to him :  enter paradise ;  and he said :  if only my people knew
and it is not for allah to punish them while you o dear prophetare amongst them ; and allah will not punish them as long as they are seeking forgiveness .
so do not make your oaths a means of deceiving one another , lest your foot should slip after having found its hold , and you taste of evil for having hinderedfrom the way of god , and suffer a grievous punishment .
they who conceal our signs and the guidance we have sent them and have made clear in the book , are condemned of god and are condemned by those who are worthy of condemning .
and said :  should we believe in two men like yourselves , whose people are our subjects ? 
and the people of madyan ; and moosa was belied , so i gave the disbelievers respite and then seized them , so howwas my punishment !
indeed the guilty will remainin the punishment of hell .
those who argue concerning allah , after his call has been answered , their argument stands refuted with their lord , and upon them shall bewrath , and there is a severe punishment for them .
they sought our judgement . andevery obstinate tyrant opposed to the truth was brought to naught .
they will be reclining on thrones lined up , and we will marry them to fair women with large , eyes .
and the tribe of a ’ ad , and firaun , and the fellowmen of lut .
and so am i :
and were the truth to follow their desires there would have been corrupted the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is therein . aye ! we have come to them with their admonition ; so it is from their admonition that they turn away .
when affliction befalls man , he appeals to us ; but when we bestow a favour upon him he says ,  all this has been given to me because of my own knowledge .  by no means ! it is a trial : yet most of them do not realize it .
for those on the right hand .
undoubtedly the hypocrites , in their fancy , seek to deceive allah whereas he will extinguish them while making them oblivious ; and when they stand up for prayer , they do it unwillingly and for others to see , and they do not remember allah except a little .
behold ! allah promised you one of the twoparties , that it should be yours : ye wished that the one unarmed should be yours , but allah willed to justify the truth according to his words and to cut off the roots of the unbelievers ; -
and to him ispraise throughout the heavens and the earth . andat night and when you are at noon .
some people , certainly , do not believe in it , but when a person 's soul reaches up to his throat
further , it will be said to them :  this is thewhich ye rejected as false !
andlot , when he said to his people ,  do you commit immorality while you are seeing ?
whether of justification or of warning ; -
allah hath set a seal on their hearts and on their hearing , and on their eyes is a veil ; great is the penalty they .
remember allah ’ s blessing upon you and his covenant with which he has bound you when you said , ‘ we hear and obey. ’ and be wary of allah . indeed allah knows best what is in the breasts .
and the night when it departs ,
know that it is allah who revives the earth after its death ; we have indeed illustrated the signs for you , for you to understand .
how can you take it back when you have reached one anotherand they have taken from you a strong covenant !
and indeed they imagined , even as ye imagined , that allah will not raise any one .
and thou askest them not any hire therefor ; it is but an admonition unto the worlds .
say :  shall i inform you of things far better than those ? for al-muttaqunthere are gardenswith their lord , underneath which rivers flow . thereineternaland azwajun mutahharatun , and allah will be pleased with them . and allah is all-seer of theslaves  .
wherefore we took vengeance on them and drowned them in the sea , for they belied our signs and were neglectful of them .
and certainly they havepassed by the town on which was rained an evil rain ; did they not then see it ? nay ! they did not hope to be raised again .
and the tribe of thamud , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the wood -- these were the confederates .
for they had opposed god and his apostle ; and whosoever opposes god , then god is severe in retribution .
verily , by thy life , in their wild intoxication , they wander in distraction , to and fro .
there is no sin upon you to enter houses not made especially for someone ’ s habitation , and you have permission for its use ; and allah knows what you disclose and what you hide .
and when the terror fell on them they cried : o moses ! pray for us unto thy lord , because he hath a covenant with thee . if thou removest the terror from us we verily will trust thee and will let the children of israel go with thee .
and we gave moses the scripture , after we had destroyed the former generations , as enlightenment for the people and guidance and mercy that they might be reminded .
allah propoundeth a similitude : man having several partners ,  quarelling , and a man wholly belonging to one man . are the two equal in likeness ? all praise unto allah . but most of them know not .
and others have confessed their faults , they have mingled a good deed and an evil one ; may be allah will turn to them ; surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
we have certainly created man into hardship .
and also because of their taking usury whereas they were prohibited therefrom , and also because of their devouring the riches of men unlawfully . and for the infidels among them we have gotten ready a torment afflictive .
then , did the people of the cities feel secure from our punishment coming to them at night while they were asleep ?
the path of those you have blessed ; not of those who have incurred your wrath , nor of those who have gone astray .
he made you heirs to their lands , and their houses , and their possessions and lands on which you had not set foot before . god has power over all things .
so when they had reached the junction of the twothey forgot their fish , and it took its way into the sea , going away .
the blind and the seeing are not equal , nor are those who believe and do good works , and the wrongdoer yet you seldom reflect .
do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
allah has made the kaa ’ bah , the respected house , a cause for peoples survival , and the sacred month , and the sacrifices in the holy land , and the garlanded animals ; this is so that you may be convinced that allah knows all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth , and that allah is the all knowing .
and thus is the seizure of your lord when he seizes the cities while they are committing wrong . indeed , his seizure is painful and severe .
they replied ,  the penalty should be that he in whose saddlebag it is found , should be heldto atone for the crime . that is how we punish the wrongdoers . 
as though they had never lived at ease therein . lo ! a far removal for madyan , even as thamud were removed afar !
yet they hamstrang her . then he said : enjoy yourselves in your dwellings three days : that is a promise , not to be falsified .
and that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the truth from thy lord , so that they may believe therein and their hearts may submit humbly unto him . lo ! allah verily is guiding those who believe unto a right path .
marry those among you who are spouseless and the virtuous among your male and female slaves , if they are poor , allah will enrichthem of his bounty ; allah is embracing , knowing .
will ye not then reflect ?
until when ya'juj and ma'juj are let out , and from every mound they are trickling down .
so exalted be allah , the true king ; no god is there but he , the lord of the honorable dominion .
o my father , do not worship the devil . the devil is disobedient to the most gracious .
did you not see the hypocrites say to their brethren , the unbelievers among the people of the book : “ if you are banished we too will go with you and will not listen to anyone concerning you ; and if war is waged against you , we will come to your aid. ” but allah bears witness that they are liars .
your companion does not err , nor does he go astray ;
and those of the people of the scripture who backed themallah brought them down from their forts and cast terror into their hearts , a groupyou killed , and a groupyou made captives .
those who repudiate their wives by ³ih¡r and then retract what they have said , shall set free a slave before they may touch each other . this you are advised , and allah is well aware of what you do .
and mention thou in the book musa : verily he was single- hearted , and was an apostle , prophet .
then ye turned away there after ; so had not the grace of allah been unto you and his mercy , ye had surely become of the losers .
and , we gave him , isaac and jacob and appointed on his descendants the prophethood and the book . we gave him his wage in this world , and in the everlasting life he shall be among the righteous .
 as for the boat , it belonged to certain men in dire want : they plied on the water : i but wished to render it unserviceable , for there was after them a certain king who seized on every boat by force .
o my people , act according to your station ; i am acting ; and certainly you will know to whom will come the chastisement degrading him , and who is a liar . and be upon the watch ; i shall be with you , watching . '
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then draw away from them and observe whatthey return . ’
for those who disbelieve , the worldly life is decked with all manner of decorations . they scoff at those who believe , but the cautious shall be above them on the day of resurrection . allah gives without count to whom he will .
shall i inform youupon whom the shaitans descend ?
exercise patience and let it be only for the cause of god . do not be grieved about them nor disappointed at their evil plans .
 indeed are we shut out 
and verily thy lord ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
or until you have a house of gold , or you ascend into the sky . and we will not believe your ascension until you bring down for us a book that we may read. ’ say , ‘ immaculate is my lord ! am i anything but a human apostle ? ! ’
o ye who believe ! fulfil your indentures . the beast of cattle is made lawful unto youexcept that which is announced unto you , game being unlawful when ye are on the pilgrimage . lo ! allah ordaineth that which pleaseth him .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord , and do not follow any masters besides him . little is the admonition that you take !
then theycame , towards him , hastening .
do they have some gods who protect them from us ? neither can they save themselves nor save their friends from us .
or is it that you have a covenant from us , right up to the day of judgement , that you will get all what you claim ?
indeed , we created the human with the fairest stature
to allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth : to him do all questions go back .
so leave them to converse vainly and amuse themselves until they meet their day which they are promised .
they will be reclining on arrayed couches , and we will wed them to big-eyed houris .
i will turn those away from my signs who behave unjustly with arrogance in the land so that even though they see all the signs they will not believe in them ; and if they see the path of rectitude , will not take it to be a way ; and if they see the way of error take it to be thepath . this is so for they have called our messages lies , and have been heedless of them . 
o believers , remember god oft ,
they also say :  when will this promise ? if ye are truthful . 
wavering between them , neither to the believers nor to the disbelievers . and whoever allah leaves astray - never will you find for him a way .
they said : by allah ! assuredly ye know that we came not to work corruption in the land , nor we have been thieves .
yet they worship , instead of allah , those who can neither benefit them nor harm them : more than this , the disbeliever has become a helper of every rebel against his lord .
and we have already written in the bookafter themention that the landis inherited by my righteous servants .
we suffice you against those who mock ,
ha , there you are ; you are called upon to expend in god 's way , and some of you are niggardly . whoso is niggardly is niggardly only to his own soul . god is the all-sufficient ; you are the needy ones . if you turn away , he will substitute another people instead of you , then they will not be your likes .
and he extracted for thema calf which had a lowing sound , and they said ,  this is your god and the god of moses , but he forgot . 
and not one of you but shall pass over it : it is for thy lord an ordinance decreed . * chapter : 19
had there been gods in heaven or earth , other than allah , both would indeed have been ruined . exalted be allah , lord of the throne , above that they describe .
the truth is from your lord . never have any doubt about it .
do not wag your tongue with it , to hurry on with it .
stand up , deliver your warning ,
those who are cautious are not accountable for them in anything , but it is a reminder in order that they be cautious .
he said , “ he says she is a heifer , neither yoked to plow the earth , nor to irrigate the field ; sound without blemish. ” they said , “ now you have brought the truth. ” so they slew her ; though they almost did not .
neither he who has been unjust , then he does good instead after evil , for surely i am the forgiving , the merciful :
then the twain journeyed until when they came unto the people of a city , they begged food from the people thereof , but they refused to entertain the twain . then they found therein a wall , about to fall down , and he set it upright . musa said : hadst thou willed , thou mightest have taken therefor a hire .
they will be rewarded for their perseverance with lofty mansions in empyrean where they will be received with greetings of peace and salutations ,
verily ! they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ? . verily ! he it is who is surrounding all things !
enter ye the gates of hell as abiders therein . hapless is the abode of the stiff-necked .
the fornicator shall not marry any but a fornicatress or idolatress , andthe fornicatress , none shall marry her but a fornicator or an idolater ; and it is forbidden to the believers .
and those who do not believe in the hereafter – we have kept prepared for them a punishment , most painful .
and we strengthened his kingdom and endowed him with wisdom and decisive judgement .
andpharaoh , owner of the stakes ? -
and we left it for a sign . is there any that will remember ?
o you who believe ! spend from what we have given you , before a day comes in which there is neither trading , nor friendship , nor intercession . the disbelievers are the wrongdoers .
his wife was standing by , so she laughed . and we gave her good news of isaac ; and after isaac , jacob .
they will say :  did there not come to you your messengers with clear signs ?  they will say ,  yes  . they will reply ,  then pray ! but the prayer of those without faith is nothing butinerror ! 
and share my task ,
and one shank is entangled with the other shank .
how many a city that was evildoing we have shattered , and set up after it another people !
say , ‘ he is able to send upon you a punishment from above you or from under your feet , or confound you asfactions , and make you taste one another ’ s violence. ’ look , how we paraphrase the signs variously so that they may understand !
, we told you that your lord has encompassed all mankind . we made the vision which we showed you and the condemned tree , mentioned in the quran , as a trial for the human being . even though we warn them , it only increases their rebellion .
and if they should dispute with thee , do thou say , 'god knows very well what you are doing .
we know well what they will say when the most upright among them will say :  you did not tarry more than a day . 
the kingof mankind ,
thereafter we made him of a sperm in a receptacle safe .
they were commanded only to worship god , devoting their faith to him alone , and to practice regular prayer , and to give alms . that is the upright religion .
said to those around him : do you not hear ?
fill up the measure and do not diminish the goods of people ,
so obey not the disbelievers , but strive against themwith the utmost endeavour , with it .
or , did we create the angels females while they were witnessing ?
such of your women as have passed the age of monthly courses , for them the prescribed period , if ye have any doubts , is three months , and for those who have no courses : for those who carry , their period is until they deliver their burdens : and for those who fear allah , he will make their path easy .
and your lord glorify
and whosoever of you is submissive unto allah and his messenger and doeth right , we shall give her her reward twice over , and we have prepared for her a rich provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you keep your duty , then be not soft in speech , lest he in whose heart is a diseaseshould be moved with desire , but speak in an honourable manner .
but when he has saved them , see how they become wrongfully insolent in the land . people , your insolence is only against yourselves ; the enjoyment of this present life , then to us you shall return and we shall tell you what you did .
excepting any who may have done wrong and thereafter changeth evil for good then verily i am forgiving , merciful .
say : 'he sent it down , who knows the secret in the heavens and earth ; he is all-forgiving , all-compassionate . '
about whatever they had been doing !
believers , be god 's helpers , as jesus , son of mary , said to the disciples ,  who will be my helpers in the cause of god ?  the disciples said ,  we shall be god 's helpers .  some of the children of israel believed in him and some denied the truth ; we supported the believers against their enemies and they triumphed over them .
those who are greedy and order other people to be greedy , who themselves conceal the bounty that allah has given them . and we have prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers .
when you appealed to your lord for help , he answered you , “ i am reinforcing you with one thousand angels in succession . ”
surely he was one of our truly believing servants .
verily it is from sulaiman , and verily it is : in the name of allah , the compassionate , the merciful .
had allah willed he would have made you all one nation , but he sends astray whomever he wills and guides whomever he wills ; and you will certainly be questioned regarding your deeds .
they said ,  noah , if you do not desist , you will , certainly , be stoned to death . 
all praise be unto allah who hath bestowed upon me , despite old age lsma'il and ls-haq ; verily my lord is the hearer of supplication .
now we have none to intercede for us ,
they will be served with a cup full of crystal clear wine ,
will you be left secure in what is here ;
that is because you took the signs of allah in derision , and the life of the world had deceived you. ’ so today , they will not be brought out of it , nor will they be asked to propitiate .
their greeting the day they meet him will be ,  peace .  and he has prepared for them a noble reward .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and it is he who gives life to the dead , and it is he who is able to do all things .
it will be no more than a single blast , when lo ! they will all be brought up before us !
some other evidence of his existence is that both the heavens and the earth stand firm at his command . when he will call you from the earth , you will start to come out .
then , when he willed , he brought him out .
again , woe unto thee , woe !
and i do not know if this may be a trial for you and a provision till a time .
and we certainly gave moses the book before , and there arose disagreements about it . had it not been for a decree that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have long been decided between them . indeed they are in a disquieting doubt about it .
what is to come is imminent .
stay away from sins
those who disbelieve are steeped in arrogance and defiance .
 truly i fear for you the penalty of a great day . 
those who believe in god and his messengers are the truthful ones and the witnesses in the sight of their lord . they shall have their reward and their light . but those who are bent on denying the truth and reject our signs shall be destined for hell .
surely he thought that he would never return .
indeed allah is able to return him .
and crops and noble sites
i deliver to you the messages of my lord , and i offer you good advice and i know from allah what you do not know .
'depart unto that which ye were wont to belie .
and we brought the children of israel across the sea , and they came unto a people who were given up to idols which they had . they said : o moses ! make for us a god even as they have gods . he said : lo ! ye are a folk who know not .
those who disbelieve spend their wealth to barfrom the path of allah . they will spend it ; but it will become a regret for them , then they will be overcome . the unbelievers shall be gathered in gehenna ,
see how they devise lies against god . that alone is an outright sin .
you may benefit from the animals for an appointed time . then they must be sacrificed at the ancient house .
if allah were to enlarge the provision for his servants , they would indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth ; but he sendsdown in due measure as he pleases . for he is with his servants well-acquainted , watchful .
therefor of the bounty of thy lord be thy discourse .
so he drew water for them and then retired to the shade , saying : ' o my lord , surely i have need of whatever good you send me '
said he , 'it was she that solicited me ' ; and a witness of her folk bore witness , 'if his shirt has been torn from before then she has spoken truly , and he is one of the liars ;
the unbelievers should not think that they can really escape us or that they can never be defeated .
there will be sent upon you a flame of fire and smoke , and you will not defend yourselves .
and ask forgiveness of your lord , then repent to him ; surely my lord is all-compassionate , all-loving . '
'lot ' they replied , 'if you do not desist , you shall be thrown out '
do not say crude words to those who call upon other than allah , lest they use crude words about allah in revenge without knowledge . as such we have made the actions of each nation seem pleasing . to their lord they shall return , and he will inform them of that they were doing .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah without an authority having come to them - great is hatredin the sight of allah and in the sight of those who have believed . thus does allah seal over every heartan arrogant tyrant .
close to the garden of refuge .
between them and the cities on which we had poured our blessings , we had placed cities in prominent positions , and between them we had appointed stages of journey in due proportion :  travel therein , secure , by night and by day . 
have they not regarded how we destroyed before them many a generation we established in the earth , as we never established you , and how we loosed heaven upon them in torrents , and made the rivers to flow beneath them ? then we destroyed them because of their sins , and raised up after them another generation ;
the truth they used to hide will become all too clear to them . but if they were sent back , they would return to what they had been forbidden . for they are indeed liars .
we bring you the truth , and indeed , we speak truly .
the refuge of such shall be hell , and they will not find any escape from it .
there , they shall neither hear idle talk , nor yet any falsehood ,
and moses said : ' o pharaoh ! i am a messenger from the lord of the universe .
and what can make you know what is the night comer ?
and there is indeed a sign in that for the faithful .
follow devotedly that which is revealed to you . you are certainly on the right path .
say , ‘ o allah ! originator of the heavens and the earth , knower of the sensible and the unseen , you will judge between your servants concerning that about which they used to differ . ’
therefore the scream overcame them at sunrise .
say : o people of the scripture ! come to an agreement between us and you : that we shall worship none but allah , and that we shall ascribe no partner unto him , and that none of us shall take others for lords beside allah . and if they turn away , then say : bear witness that we are they who have surrendered .
such has been god ’ s precedent with those who passed away before . you will find no change in god ’ s system .
god created the heavens and the earth in six days . his throne existed on water so that he could test you and find out those among you who do good deeds . , if you were to tell them that after death they would be brought back to life again , the unbelievers would say ,  this is nothing but obvious magic . 
he shows you his signs . so which of the signs of allah do you deny ?
and by the night when it is calm !
had they believed and were cautious , far better for them would be the reward from allah , if they but knew .
said ,  you will plant for seven years consecutively ; and what you harvest leave in its spikes , except a little from which you will eat .
and there is abundant fruit in it for you to eat . 
surely god loves those who fight in his cause in full formations as though they were a compact wall .
then he revealed to allah 's servant whatever he had to reveal .
howwas then my punishment and my warning !
abiders they shall be therein , so long as the heavens and the earth remain , save as thy lord may will . verily thy lord is the doer of whatsoever he intendeth .
o men ! here is a parable set forth ! listen to it ! those on whom , besides allah , ye call , can not createa fly , if they all met together for the purpose ! and if the fly should snatch away anything from them , they would have no power to release it from the fly . feeble are those who petition and those whom they petition !
wealth and sons are ornaments of the life of this world ; and good deeds that last – their reward is better before your lord , and are better in respect of hope .
on that day we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll of parchment . as we originated the first creation , so shall we repeat it . this is a promise binding on us . truly , we shall fulfill it .
there is the type of man whose speech about this world 's life may dazzle thee , and he calls allah to witness about what is in his heart ; yet is he the most contentious of enemies .
and verily , hell is the promised abode for them all !
the day he will gather them together as well as those whom they worship besides allah , he will ask :  was it ye who let these my servants astray , or did they stray from the path themselves ? 
and the evilof what they wrought shall become plain to them , and the very thing they mocked at shall beset them .
how shall it be then , when we shall gather them on the day whereof there is no doubt , and every soul shall be repaid in full that which it hath earned , and they shall not be wronged .
are your disbelievers better than those , or have you immunity in the scripture ?
and those of your women as have passed the age of monthly courses , for them the 'iddah , if you have doubts , is three months , and for those who have no coursestheir 'iddahis three months likewise , except in case of death ] . and for those who are pregnant , their 'iddahis until they deliver , and whosoever fears allah and keeps his duty to him , he will make his matter easy for him .
and whoso saith unto his parents : fie upon you both ! do ye threaten me that i shall be brought forthwhen generations before me have passed away ? and they twain cry unto allah for help : woe unto thee ! believe ! lo ! the promise of allah is true . but he saith : this is naught save fables of the men of old :
the prophet and the faithful may not plead for the forgiveness of the polytheists , even if they should berelatives , after it has become clear to them that they will be the inmates of hell .
fight them , allah will punish them with your hands and degrade them . he will grant you victory over them and heal the chests of a believing nation .
the hypocrites will be in the lowest place of the fire , you will not find a helper for them .
if he divorces her finally , she shall not be lawful to him after that , until she marries another husband . if he divorces her , then it is no fault in them to return to each other , if they suppose that they will maintain god 's bounds . those are god 's bounds ; he makes them clear unto a people that have knowledge .
“ therefore fear allah and obey me . ”
do those who scheme evils feel secure that god will not cause the earth to cave in with them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not perceive ?
they said ,  art thou the one that did this with our gods , o abraham ? 
said : lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if ye had but sure belief .
surely in that is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
no recent revival of the remembrance comes to them from their lord , except that they play with it as they listen
no ! indeed , you deny the retribution .
neither ending nor forbidden .
so he abandoned them , and said , ‘ o my people ! certainly i communicated to you the message of my lord , and i was your well-wisher , but you did not like well-wishers . ’
and speak not , concerning that which your own tongues qualify , the falsehood :  this is lawful , and this is forbidden ,  so that ye invent a lie against allah . lo ! those who invent a lie against allah will not succeed .
gehenna , wherein they are roasted ; an evil stablishment !
wherein they will abide forever . that is god 's true promise ; he is the mighty , the wise one .
and allah hath brought you forth from the bellies of your mothers while ye know not aught , and he hath appointed for you hearing and sight and hearts that haply ye might give thanks .
and the mountains – how they have been established ?
if they cry lies to thee , so too before them the people of noah cried lies , and ad and thamood ,
maybe your lord will have mercy on you , but if you revert , wewill revert , and we have made hell a prison for the faithless .
hearts will pound loudly on that day ,
surely these love the transitory and neglect a grievous day before them .
aliflaammeem .
in whose wealth a due share is included
and we had certainly given moses nine evident signs , so ask the children of israelwhen he came to them and pharaoh said to him ,  indeed i think , o moses , that you are affected by magic . 
the likeness of jesus in god ’ s sight is that of adam : he created him from dust , then said to him , “ be , ” and he was .
they said , 'you are naught but mortals like us ; the all-merciful has not sent down anything . you are speaking only lies . '
if ye prayed for victory and judgment , now hath the judgment come to you : if ye desist , it will be best for you : if ye return , so shall we . not the least good will your forces be to you even if they were multiplied : for verily allah is with those who believe !
if we delay in afflicting them with our punishment for an appointed time , they ask ,  what is preventing itfrom taking place ?  on the day when itbefalls them , no one will be able to escape from it and that which they have mocked will surround them from all sides .
who hath created and then proportioned ,
but if theyturn awaysay :  i give you a noticeto be known to us all alike . and i know not whether that which you are promisedis near or far . 
and exalt him in the night , and at the ends of the prostrations .
he said , ‘ throw . ’ so when they threw , they bewitched the people ’ s eyes and overawed them , producing a tremendous magic .
let man consider his food :
the word of your lord is perfect in truthfulness and justice ; no one can change his words . he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
say :  the death from which ye flee will truly overtake you : then will ye be sent back to the knower of things secret and open : and he will tell youthe things that ye did ! 
thereafter they could neither scale it , nor could they pierce it .
he said , ‘ did you see ? ! when we took shelter at the rock , indeed i forgot about the fish—and none but satan made me forget to mention it ! —and it made its way into the sea in an amazing manner ! ’
we had made a solemn covenant with those who call themselves christians , but they forgot their share of the guidance that was sent to them . we have induced hatred and animosity among them which will remain with them until the day of judgment when god will tell them about what they had done .
woe unto the repudiators on that day !
there they shall hear no idle talk , no cause of sin ,
and mislead them and tempt them , and order them to slit the ears of animals ; and order them to alter god 's creation .  he who holds satan as friend in place of god will assuredly be damned to perdition .
and this soil secure ,
indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
it was no more than a single mighty blast , and behold ! they werequenched and silent .
those who say when calamity befalls them , “ indeed we belong to allah and indeed it is to him we are to return . ”
those who are polytheists will say : if allah had pleased we would not have associatednor our fathers , nor would we have forbiddenanything ; even so did those before them reject until they tasted our punishment . say : have you any knowledge with you so you should bring it forth to us ? you only follow a conjecture and you only tell lies .
and whoso doeth good works , whether of male or female , and heis a believer , such will enter paradise and they will not be wronged the dint in a date-stone .
those who were given the book did not become divided except after clear evidence was given to them .
and when the camels are left untended ,
they said : call on your lord for our sake to make it plain to us what her color is . musa said : he says , surely she is a yellow cow ; her color is intensely yellow , giving delight to the beholders .
recall when their brother salih said to them :  have you no fear ? 
they will be shown each other . the criminal will wish that he could be ransomed from the punishment of that day by his children
it is god who has subjected the sea to you so that you may sail thereon by his command , and so that you may seek his bounty , and so that you may be grateful .
if you call upon them , they can not hear your prayer . and if they hear it , they can not answer it . on the day of resurrection they will disown you for associating others with allah in his divinity . no one can inform you of the truth save the all-aware .
 and weigh with scales true and upright .
surely i am a faithful apostle to you
thereupon they realized their own foolishness and said ,  we ourselves are wrong-doers  .
but only as a reminder to those who fear .
indeed , we have sent you with the truth as a bringer of good tidings and a warner . and there was no nation but that there had passed within it a warner .
think not of those , who are slain in the way of allah , as dead . nay , they are living . with their lord they have provision .
'jinn and human , did there not come to you messengers of your own who narrated to you my verses and warned you of encountering this day ' they will reply : 'we bear witness against ourselves ' indeed , the life of this world beguiled them . they will bear witness against themselves that they were unbelievers .
and they say , “ be jews or christians , and you will be guided. ” say , “ rather , the religion of abraham , the monotheist ; he was not an idolater . ”
seest thou not that we have set the devils on the disbelievers to confound them with confusion ?
and lo ! of his persuasion verily was abraham
and spend of what allah has granted you by way of sustenance before death should come to any of you and he should say : “ lord , why did you not defer my return for a while so that i might give alms and be among the righteous ? ”
then we made him , a drop , in a secure receptacle .
had god pleased , he would have united you in one community ; but he lets go astray whoever he will , and guides whoever he will , and you will surely be called upon to account for all your actions .
and of his signs is your slumbering by night and day , and your seeking after his bounty . surely in that are signs for a people who hear .
then do not include me , my lord , among these wrong-doing people . 
nor any food except pus ,
do not slacken in the pursuit of these people . if you are suffering , they are also suffering like you , but you expect from allah what they do not expect , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise .
is he who knoweth that what is revealed unto thee from thy lord is the truth like him who is blind ? but only men of understanding heed ;
when my servants ask you about me , say that i am near . i respond to the call of one who calls , whenever he calls to me : let them , then , respond to me , and believe in me , so that they may be rightly guided .
and those who disbelieve say : do not listen to this quran and make noise therein , perhaps you may overcome .
and lo ! this your religion is one religion and i am your lord , so keep your duty unto me .
but his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and we had placed between them and the cities  which we had blest cities easy to be seen , and we had made the stages of journey between them easy :  travel in them nights and days secure .
and lower to them the wing of humility , out of mercy , and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me when i was a child . ”
by allah ! assuredly we have sent apostles to communities before thee , then the satan made their works fairseeming unto them , so he is their patron to-day , and unto them shall be a torment afflictive .
and when i inspired the disciplesto believe in me and my apostle , they said :  we believe , and you bear witness that we submit 
we have created seven heavens above you and have never been neglectful to our creation .
andwhen moses prayed for water for his people , so we said ,  strike with your staff the stone .  and there gushed forth from it twelve springs , and every people knew its watering place .  eat and drink from the provision of allah , and do not commit abuse on the earth , spreading corruption . 
which of the wonders of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and he committed the sun and the moon to your service , both continuously pursuing their courses , and he committed the night and the day to your service .
and a burdened soul can not bear the burden of another and if one weighed down by burden should cry forits burden , not aught of it shall be carried , even though he be near of kin . you warn only those who fear their lord in secret and keep up prayer ; and whoever purifies himself , he purifies himself only forhis own soul ; and to allah is the eventual coming .
perish the liars ,
if you have faith in god 's revelations , eat the flesh of the animal which has been slaughtered with a mention of his name .
so we destroyed - stronger in power than these ; - andhas passed on the parable of the peoples of old .
who spend in prosperity and in adversity , for those who curb their anger and those who forgive people . and allah loves the charitable
god has created you from dust , then from a drop of semen and then divided you into pairs ; no female conceives or gives birth without his knowledge ; and no one 's life is prolonged or shortened , but it is recorded in a book . that surely is easy for god .
and those who disbelieve say : we shall by no means believe in this qur'an nor in that which hath been before it . would that thou couldst see when the wrong-doers shall be made to stand before their lord ! they shall cast back the word one to another ; those who were deemed weak will say unto those who were stiff-necked : had it not been for you , surely we should have been believers .
he who shall bring a good deed shall be rewarded with what is better . but those who bring evil deeds shall not be requited more than their deeds .
my wealth hath not availed me ,
he therefore prayed to his lord , “ these are a guilty nation ! ”
fighting is obligatory for you , though it is hateful to you . but you may hate a thing although it is good for you , and may love a thing although it is evil for you . allah knows , and you do not .
and the earth have we laid out , how gracious is the spreader !
not equal are those of the believers who sit , except those who are disabled , and those who strive hard and fight in the cause of allah with their wealth and their lives . allah has preferred in grades those who strive hard and fight with their wealth and their lives above those who sit . unto each , allah has promised good , but allah has preferred those who strive hard and fight , above those who sitby a huge reward ;
when they sought our judgement , every stubborn oppressor was frustrated .
o you who believe , on you restsfor your own selves . if you follow the right path those who have gone astray will not be able to do you harm . to god have all of you to return , when he will tell you what you were doing .
no profit to him from all his wealth , and all his gains !
but allah did pour his calm on the messenger and on the believers , and sent down forces which ye saw not : he punished the unbelievers ; thus doth he reward those without faith .
neither did i make them witness the creations of the heavens and the earth , nor witness their own creation ; nor does it befit my majesty to choose misleaders as aides .
if they are driven out , they will not go with them , nor , if they are attacked , will they help them . indeed , if they go to their help , they will turn their backs in flight , and then they will not be helped .
when they saw it as a cloud advancing toward their valleys , they said , ‘ this cloud brings us rain. ’ ‘ no , it is what you sought to hasten : a hurricane carrying a painful punishment ,
do they not see how many of the generations we have destroyed before them ? verily , they will not return to them .
and , when they will dispute in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant ;  verily ! we followed you , can you then take from us some portion of the fire ? 
on the day whereon their faces shall be rolled in the fire , they will say : oh that we had obeyed allah and had obeyed the apostle !
and if we delay the torment for them till a determined term , they are sure to say ,  what keeps it back ?  verily , on the day it reaches them , nothing will turn it away from them , and they will be surrounded bythat at which they used to mock !
it will come to them suddenly , while they are unaware .
when we heard the guidance , we believed in it , and whosoever believes in his lord shall fear neither shortage nor injustice .
he taught adam all the names . then he introducedto the angels , asking them to tell him the names of these beings , if the angels were true to their claim .
they ask you concerning the soul ; proclaim “ the soul is an entity by the command of my lord , and you have not received knowledge except a little . ”
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am placing a successor on earth. ” they said , “ will you place in it someone who will cause corruption in it and shed blood , while we declare your praises and sanctify you ? ” he said , “ i know what you do not know . ”
and i will become upset and my tongue will fail me . so send for aaron .
and that was 'aad , who rejected the signs of their lord and disobeyed his messengers and followed the order of every obstinate tyrant .
fashioning for him whatsoever he would -- places of worship , statues , porringers like water-troughs , and anchored cooking-pots . 'labour , o house of david , in thankfulness ; for few indeed are those that are thankful among my servants . '
and we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a reminder and a plain quran .
except those who patiently endured and did good deeds ; for them is forgiveness , and a great reward .
and now when ye have withdrawn from them and that which they worship , except god , betake yourselves to the cave ; your lord will unfold for you some of his mercy , and will prepare for you of your affair an easy arrangement .
“ the manner in which my lord has pardoned me and made me of the honoured ones ! ”
plead with your lord for forgiveness , then turn to him penitently . my lord is indeed all-merciful , all-affectionate . ’
and they are with us , verily , of the chosen and the best !
a part he hath guided , and upon a part the straying hath been justified . verily they have taken the satans as patrons instead of allah and they imagine that they are guided ones .
those who have split up their religion and have become divided into sects , each party exulting in what they have .
do not turn away those who supplicate their lord morning and evening , seeking his magnificence . you are not accountable for them in the least , nor they for you at all . if you drive them away you will only be unjust .
in gardens , inquiring .
and when the slave of allah stood up in prayer to him , they crowded on him , almost stifling .
certainly we sent nuh to his people , so he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than him ; surely i fear for you the chastisement of a grievous day .
which we have made as a torment for the unjust ?
god created the heavens and the earth with the truth ; surely in that is a sign to the believers .
so when they went with him , and agreed to put him in the bottom of the well , and we revealed to him , 'thou shalt tell them of this their doing when they are unaware . '
and said ,  i am sick , 
allah would explain to you and guide you by the examples of those who were before you , and would turn to you in mercy . allah is knower , wise .
and on the day when we will ceremonially gather the righteous to the merciful ,
this is indeed the manifest trial . '
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and obey the apostle , so that mercy may be shown to you .
if they could find a refuge , or a hideout , or a hole , they would turn to it in frantic haste .
moses replied ,  my lord , i fear they will reject me ,
certainly you will find the most violent of people in enmity for those who believethe jews and those who are polytheists , and you will certainly find the nearest in friendship to those who believethose who say : we are christians ; this is because there are priests and monks among them and because they do not behave proudly .
and most of them follow not except assumption . indeed , assumption avails not against the truth at all . indeed , allah is knowing of what they do .
when he said to his father and his people ,  what do you worship ?
and for those who were jews we prohibited what we have related to you already , and we did them no injustice , but they were unjust to themselves .
we sent a torrential rain unto the . consider how disastrous the end of the criminals was !
they try to annoy you so that they can expel you from the land . had they been successful , no one would have been left behind except a few .
nay , but we gave these and their fathers ease until life grew long for them . see they not how we aim to the land , reducing it of its outlying parts ? can they then be the victors ?
believers , let those your right hand owns and those who have not come of age ask permission of you three times before the dawn prayer , when you put aside your garments , in the heat of noon , and after the night prayer . these are the three occasions of privacy . there is no fault in you or them , apart from these , that they go about you , you are of each other . as such allah makes plain to you his verses , allah is the knower , the wise .
there shall be a hospitality of boiling water
those who bear the throne , and all who are round about it , hymn the praises of their lord and believe in him and ask forgiveness for those who believe : our lord ! thou comprehendest all things in mercy and knowledge , therefor forgive those who repent and follow thy way . ward off from them the punishment of hell .
we have sent our messengers with proofs , and sent them with the book and the scales , so that people might establish the scale . we have sent down iron in which there is great might and diverse benefit for people , so that allah knows those who help him and his messengers in the unseen . indeed , allah is the strong , the almighty .
glorified be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne ! exalted be he from all that they ascribe .
for muslim men and women , - for believing men and women , for devout men and women , for true men and women , for men and women who are patient and constant , for men and women who humble themselves , for men and women who give in charity , for men and women who fast , for men and women who guard their chastity , and for men and women who engage much in allah 's praise , - for them has allah prepared forgiveness and great reward .
those who turned away from the way of allah and would seek to render it crooked and in the herafter they were disbelievers .
remember job when he called on his lord saying ,  i have been afflicted with great distress : but you are the most merciful of the merciful . 
when they had despaired ofhim , they withdrew to confer privately . the eldest of them said , ‘ don ’ t you know that your father has taken apledge from you by allah , and earlier you have neglected your duty in regard to joseph ? so i will never leave this land until my father permits me , or allah passes a judgement for me , and he is the best of judges .
touched by good , he is ungenerous .
how can they come to you for judgment when they already have the torah which contains the decree of god ! it does not take them long to disregard your judgment ; they are not true believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? rather they are not certain .
the polytheists say , ‘ had allah wished , we would not have worshiped anything besides him—neither we , nor our fathers—nor we would have forbidden anything without his sanction. ’ those who were before them had acted likewise . is the apostles ’ duty anything but to communicate in clear terms ?
so he watered , and moved into the shade and prayed :  my lord , i have need of whatever good you send me . 
“ o my people , this is the she-camel of god , a sign for you . let her graze on god ’ s land , and do not harm her , lest an imminent punishment overtakes you . ”
o ye are the best community sent forth unto mankind ; ye command that which is reputable and ye prevent that which is disreputable . and ye believe in allah if the people of the book believe , surely it were better for them . of them are believers , and most of them are transgressors .
say ,  a day has already been appointed for you which you can neither delay nor advance by a single moment . 
he has sent down upon you , , the book in truth , confirming what was before it . and he revealed the torah and the gospel .
when evil touches him , impatient ,
until , when death comes to one of them , he says :  o my lord ! send me back , -
we said : fear not , surely you shall be the uppermost ,
when they disregarded the warnings that had been given them , we rescued those who forbade evil ; but we visited the wrong-doers with a grievous punishment because they were given to transgression .
for that is the one who drives away the orphan
we requited them with that for their ingratitude . do we not requite ingrates ?
the word will come down upon them for their wrongdoing , and they will not speak .
wherein every matter is wisely determined
you will find in their faces the brightness of bliss .
most of the former peoples went astray before them ,
divorce may be pronounced twice ; then either the wife be kept honourably or parted with gracefully . and it is not lawful for you to take back anything out of what you have given them . there is , however , an exception to this ; if you fear that they might not be able to keep within the limits imposed by allah , there is no harm if both agree mutually that the wife should obtain divorce by giving something as compensation to the husband . these are the bounds set by allah ; therefore do not violate them , for those who violate the bounds of aiiah are the tansgressors .
and i have come confirming that which was before me of the taurat , and to make lawful to you part of what was forbidden to you , and i have come to you with a proof from your lord . so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces shall be turned back into the fire , they shall say : o would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the apostle !
is it not evidence enough for them that the learned among the children of israel have recognized this ?
and a food that chokes , and a painful torment .
when the night covered him over with darkness he saw a star . he said :  this is my lord .  but when it set , he said :  i like not those that set . 
and we have appointed positions for the moon till it returns like an old branch of the date palm .
“ o my people , i ask you no wage for it ; my wage lies with him who originated me . do you not understand ? ”
for a certain appointed time ,
then will the true promise draw nigh : then behold ! the eyes of the unbelievers will fixedly stare in horror :  ah ! woe to us ! we were indeed heedless of this ; nay , we truly did wrong ! 
we sent to them two messengers and they rejected both of them as liars . then we strengthened them with a third .
indeed , it is an evil abode and evil dwelling-place . 
they will say , “ did not your messengers come to you with clear signs ? ” they will say , “ yes. ” they will say , “ then pray , but the prayers of the disbelievers will always be in vain . ”
what ! is he who goes prone upon his face better guided or he who walks upright upon a straight path ?
not equal are the inhabitants of the fire and the inhabitants of paradise . the inhabitants of paradise -- they are the triumphant .
they ask you for judgement about 'kalalah ' . say :  god has given a decision in the matter of inheritance .  if a man dies and leaves no child behind but have a sister , she will get a half of what he owned , as he would have done the whole of what she possessed if she had died a childless person . in ease he has two sisters then they will get two-thirds of the heritage . but if he has both brothers and sisters , the male will inherit a share equal to that of two females . god makes this manifest to you lest you wander astray , for god has knowledge of everything .
thou wilt indeed find them , of all people , most greedy of life , -even more than the idolaters : each one of them wishes he could be given a life of a thousand years : but the grant of such life will not save him frompunishment . for allah sees well all that they do .
one who is wronged and who retaliates by that which is equal to his suffering , god will certainly help him ; he is all-pardoning and all-forgiving .
he who shall roast into the great fire ,
in whatever activity you may be engaged , and whichever part of the quran you recite , and whatever deed you do , we are witness to it when you are engaged in it . not the smallest particle on the earth or in heaven is hidden from your lord ; and there is nothing smaller or bigger but is recorded in a clear book .
it is he who doth show you the lightning , by way both of fear and of hope : it is he who doth raise up the clouds , heavy withrain !
yet when news ofthey had reserved for ar-rahman comes to one of them , his face is blackened , and he grieves in silence inwardly .
indeed , this is a glorious koran ,
if only there had been among the generations before you , persons having wisdom , prohibitingfrom al-fasadin the earth , except a few of those whom we saved from among them . those who did wrong pursued the enjoyment of good things oflife , and were mujrimun .
as for those who avoid the worship of idols , and devote themselves to god—theirs is the good news . so give good news to my servants .
everyone in the heavens and earth will be terrified on the day when the trumpet will be sounded except those whom god will save . everyone will humbly come into the presence of god .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians as allies ; some of them are allies of one another . whoever of you allies himself with them is one of them . god does not guide the wrongdoing people .
those were the towns whose story we relate unto you . and there came indeed to them their messengers with clear proofs , but they were not such as to believe in that which they had rejected before . thus allah does seal up the hearts of the disbelievers .
such are they who have lost their souls , and that which they used to invent hath failed them .
does he who created not know , while he is the subtle , the acquainted ?
and so did 'ad , and pharaoh and lot 's brethren ,
if , then , allah bring thee back to any of them , and they ask thy permission to come out , say :  never shall ye come out with me , nor fight an enemy with me : for ye preferred to sit inactive on the first occasion : then sit yewith those who lag behind . 
and tall date-palms , with ranged clusters ;
and say “ keep on with your works – allah will now see your deeds , and so will his noble messenger and the muslims ; and soon you will return to the one who knows everything – the hidden and the visible – so he will inform you of what you used to do . ”
say : have ye considered what provision allah hath sent down for you , how ye have made of it lawful and unlawful ? hath allah permitted you , or do ye invent a lie concerning allah ?
and when you travel throughout the land , there is no blame upon you for shortening the prayer , if you fear that those who disbelieve may disruptyou . indeed , the disbelievers are ever to you a clear enemy .
and surely we are best aware of those most worthy to be burned therein .
those who disbelieve say , “ do not listen to this quran , and talk over it , so that you may prevail . ”
the sabbath was only madefor those who disagreed ; but allah will judge between them on the day of judgment , as to their differences .
and we made the son of mary and his mother as a sign : we gave them both shelter on high ground , affording rest and security and furnished with springs .
and the king said : surely i see seven fat kine which seven lean ones devoured ; and seven green ears andothers dry : o chiefs ! explain to me my dream , if you can interpret the dream .
therefore have patience ; allah will not let the wage of the gooddoers go to waste .
god madean everlasting task for his successors , so that perhaps they would return .
saad , by the holy readingof the remembrance .
and , who is better in saying than he who invites to allah , does what is right , and says : 'surely , i am of those who surrender '
said :  these two are surely magicians . they want to deprive you of your land with their magic , and eradicate your distinct way .
and if ye fear a divergence between the twain , set up an arbiter from his household and an arbiter from her household ; then if the twain desire rectification allah shall bring harmony between the twain ; verily allah is ever knowing , aware .
those who are niggardly and command mankind to niggardliness and hide that which allah hath vouchsafed unto them of his grace ; and we , have gotten ready for the infidels a torment ignominous ;
those are they to whom we gave the book , the judgment , the prophethood ; so if these disbelieve in it , we have already entrusted it to a people who do not disbelieve in it .
we have not heard of any such thing in the old religion . this is nothing but a fabrication .
so summon to this , and be steadfast , just as you have been commanded , and do not follow their desires , and say , ‘ i believe in whatever book allah has sent down . i have been commanded to do justice among you . allah is our lord and your lord . our deeds belong to us and your deeds belong to you . there is no quarrel between us and you . allah will bring us together and toward him is the destination . ’
when theyforgot what was preached to them , we saved the preachers from evil and afflicted the unjust for their evil deeds , with a dreadful torment .
as to those who hold fast by the book and establish regular prayer , - never shall we suffer the reward of the righteous to perish .
then , indeed your lord , to those who emigrated after they had been compelledand thereafter foughtand were patient - indeed , your lord , after that , is forgiving and merciful
and at night-time ; have ye then no sense ?
its seal will be of musk -- for this let the aspirants aspire --
and they said ,  do not ever abandon your deities : abandon neither wadd , nor suwa ' , and neither yaghuth , nor yauq nor nasr ! 
on the day when we gather them all together we shall say to the idolaters : 'where are your partners now , those whom you claimed '
your god is one god . and they who believe not in the world to come , their hearts deny , and they have waxed proud .
if ye go not forth he will afflict you with a painful doom , and will choose instead of you a folk other than you . ye can not harm him at all . allah is able to do all things .
they worship in houses which allah has bidden to be exalted and his name to be remembered therein ; they hallow him therein in mornings and evenings-
they will say . 'we have not been of those who prayed .
have they not heard the stories of those before them ? the people of noah , and aad , and thamood ; and the people of abraham , and the inhabitants of median , and the overturned cities ? their messengers came to them with the clear proofs . god never wronged them , but they used to wrong their own selves .
if those who deny the truth were to fight you , they would certainly turn their backs ; then they would find neither protector nor helper :
and we have taken off from thee thy burthen ,
the chiefs of those who were stiff-necked amongst his people said unto those who were counted weak -unto such of them as believed : know ye that salih is a sent one of his lord ? they said : verily we are believers in that wherewith he hath been sent .
as an example to those who are bent on denying the truth , god cited the wife of noah and the wife of lot , who were married to two of our righteous servants , but who betrayed them . so they could not help them against god , and they were told ,  enter the fire along with all the others . 
they will turn to one another ask questions ,
the elite of pharaoh ’ s people said , ‘ will you leave moses and his people to cause corruption in the land , and to abandon you and your gods ? ’ he said , ‘ we will kill their sons and spare their women , and indeed we are dominant over them . ’
if , then , they have patience , the fire will be a home for them ! and if they beg to be received into favour , into favour will they notbe received .
the heart did not liewhat it saw .
those who will receive the books of the records of their deeds in their right hands will say ,  come and read my record .
for them therein shall be groaning and therein they shall not hear .
that they may understand my speech .
has there come to you the news of the overwhelming ?
when you faced them he madeseem few to you in numbers , and made you appear fewer in their eyes , so that god could accomplish what had been decreed ; for all things rest with god .
and those who believe in allah and all his noble messengers and do not make any distinction in belief between any of them – to them allah will soon give them their reward ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
on that day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they shall say : 'would that we had obeyed allah and obeyed the messenger '
to your lord , that day , is thepermanence .
surely allah has purchased of the believers their lives and their belongings and in return has promised that they shall have paradise . they fight in the way of allah , and slay and are slain . such is the promise he has made incumbent upon himself in the torah , and the gospel , and the qur'an . who is more faithful to his promise than allah ? rejoice , then , in the bargain you have made with him . that indeed is the mighty triumph .
verily i am unto you an apostle trusted .
for your lord will have revealed to it .
then he proportioned him and breathed into him of his spirit , and made for you hearing , sight , and hearts . little do you thank .
theewe worship ; theewe ask for help .
worship allah and join none with him in worship , and do good to parents , kinsfolk , orphans , al-masakin , the neighbour who is near of kin , the neighbour who is a stranger , the companion by your side , the wayfarer , and thosewhom your right hands possess . verily , allah does not like such as are proud and boastful ;
“ with me , the decree does not change , and nor do i oppress the bondmen . ”
and even so we sent not a warner before theeinto any township but its luxurious ones said : lo ! we found our fathers following a religion , and we are following their footprints .
then those that feared their lord shall be driven in companies into paradise , till , when they have come thither , and its gates are opened , and its keepers will say to them , 'peace be upon you ! well you have fared ; enter in , to dwell forever . '
and purify your robes ,
it is from solomon , and it is , ‘ in the name of god , the gracious , the merciful .
say ,  shall i tell you who will receive a worse reward from god ? those whom god has rejected and with whom he has been angry . they were condemned as apes and swine and those who worship the evil . these are in the worst plight and farthest astray from the right path . 
the day we shall usher the righteous before ar-rahman like envoys into the presence of a king ,
so they disputed their matter among themselves , and kept their confidential talks secret .
alif , lam , ra.a book which we have revealed to you , , that you might bring mankind out of darknesses into the light by permission of their lord - to the path of the exalted in might , the praiseworthy -
he said : then go down hence ! it is not for thee to show pride here , so go forth ! lo ! thou art of those degraded .
o you who believe , have fear of displeasing god , and believe in his prophet . he will give you twice as much of his bounty and place a light for you to walk in , and forgive you , for god is forgiving and kind ;
we did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them to play .
they say , ‘ the all-beneficent has taken offsprings. ’ immaculate is he ! indeed , they arehonoured servants .
and call to mind when we delivered you from pharaoh 's people who perpetrated on you a terrible torment , putting your males to death and sparing your females . surely in it there was an awesome trial for you from your lord .
and as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them their wages in full . allah loveth not wrong-doers .
so leave them to their ignorance for a time .
believers , take your precautions . march in detachments or march all together .
we took abraham and lot safely to the land in which we had sent blessings to the worlds .
then you , you misguided , who deny the truth .
and by the bait-ul-ma'mur ;
 because allah will never change the grace which he hath bestowed on a people until they change what is in theirsouls : and verily allah is he who heareth and knoweth . 
and who does more wrong than he who is reminded of the ayatof his lord , then he turns aside therefrom ? verily , we shall exact retribution from the mujrimun .
the day they see the angels , - no joy will there be to the sinners that day : thewill say :  there is a barrier forbiddenaltogether ! 
muhammad is the messenger of god . those who are with him are firm and unyielding towards those who deny the truth , but compassionate towards one another . you see them bowing and prostrating themselves , seeking the grace of god and his good will . their marks are on their faces , the traces of their prostrations ; they are described in the torah and in the gospel as being like a seed which sends forth its shoot , then makes it strong ; it then becomes thick , and it stands firm on its own stem , delighting the sowers . he seeks to enrage the disbelievers through them . god has promised forgiveness and a great reward to those of them who believe and do good works .
your friend is only god , and his messenger , and the believers who perform the prayer and pay the alms , and bow them down .
then he cast a glance at the stars ,
but as for one who is miserly and unheeding ,
and most surely i am most forgiving to him who repents and believes and does good , then continues to follow the right direction .
o lord , forgive me , my parents and the faithful on the day the reckoning is done . 
before them the people of noah rejected : they rejected our servant , and said ,  here is one possessed !  , and he was driven out .
and even if we had sent down unto youa message written on paper so that they could touch it with their hands , the disbelievers would have said :  this is nothing but obvious magic ! 
when our enlightening revelations are recited to them , their only argument against it is ,  bring our forefathers back to life if what you say is true  .
why should we not believe in allah and in the truth that has come down to us ? why should we not hope for admission among the righteous '
yet they are my enemies except the lord of all the worlds
so that he could make coats of mail and properly measure their rings . we told him and his people to act righteously . we are well-aware of what you do .
they shall say , 'our lord , our adversity prevailed over us ; we were an erring people .
allah it is who appointed for you the earth for a dwelling-place and the sky for a canopy , and fashioned you and perfected your shapes , and hath provided you with good things . such is allah , your lord . then blessed be allah , the lord of the worlds !
theyask you regarding the last day , as to when is its appointed time .
but we said ,  do not be afraid . it is you who shall prevail . 
:  if you do good , you do good for your ownselves , and if you do evilagainst yourselves .  then , when the second promise came to pass , to make your faces sorrowful and to enter the mosqueas they had entered it before , and to destroy with utter destruction all that fell in their hands .
this ! taste it then , and know that for the infidels is the torment of the fire .
know that your wealth and children are a trial and that there is an immense reward with god .
they say ,  there is nothing but our life in this world : we die , we live , nothing but time destroys us .  they have no knowledge of this ; they only follow conjecture .
i shall certainly fill gehenna with you and every one of them that follows you '
obeyed , moreover trusty .
so we caught each one upon his sin ; so among them is one upon whom we sent a shower of stones ; and among them is one who was seized by the scream ; and among them is one whom we buried in the earth , and among them is one whom we drowned ; it did not befit allah ’ s majesty to oppress them , but they were wronging themselves .
the inhabitants of the fire and the inhabitants of paradise are not equal . the inhabitants of paradise shall be triumphant .
and if you are unable to bring forth– and we declare that you can never bring one – then fear the fire , the fuel of which is men and stones ; kept ready for the disbelievers .
but when they see it approaching , the faces of those who disbelieve will be distressed , and it will be said ,  this is that for which you used to call . 
sayto the bedouins who lagged behind :  you shall be called to fight against a people given to great warfare , then you shall fight them , or they shall surrender . then if you obey , allah will give you a fair reward , but if you turn away as you did turn away before , he will punish you with a painful torment . 
then the groups differed amongst themselves ; therefore ruin is for the unjust by the punishment of an agonising day .
and noah said , 'my lord , leave not upon the earth of the unbelievers even one .
he said : you are indeed granted your petition , o musa
they said , “ you are nothing but mortals like us ; the most gracious has not sent down anything – you are nothing but liars . ”
has the time not come for the faithful when their hearts in all humility should engage in the remembrance of god and of the revelation of truth , so that they should not become like those who were given the book before them , whose hearts with the passage of time became hardened and many of whom were disobedient ?
but those who believe and do good deeds we shall admit into gardens with streams of running water , where they will abide for ever , with fairest of companions and coolest of shades .
they said , 'if thou givest not over , lot , thou shalt assuredly be one of the expelled . '
o lord , make us not an example of punishment for infidels , and forgive us , o lord . you are all-mighty and all-wise . 
and that : establish prayer and fear him ; and it is he unto whom ye shall be gathered .
that is paradise , which we give as inheritance to those of our servants who were fearing of allah .
and to many an apostle we have mentioned before , and to many other apostles we have not mentioned to you ; and to moses god spoke directly .
god has shown you how to absolve yourselves of your oaths . he is your guardian and is all-knowing and all-wise .
in the meantime we made the others approach that place .
then , on that day , not a soul will be wronged in the least , and ye shall but be repaid the meeds of your past deeds .
“ and remember when he made you successors of a ’ ad and gave you a region in the earth , so you now build palaces in the soft plains and carve houses in rocks ; therefore remember allah ’ s favours and do not roam the earth spreading turmoil . ”
how many towns have we destroyed because their people were steeped in iniquity : so they lie fallen down upon their turrets ! how many wells lie deserted ; and how many towering palaces lie in ruins !
and that is no great matter for allah .
for every news there is a fact , i.e . for everything there is an appointed termand you will come to know .
indeed to allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and brings death . and besides allah you do not have any guardian or helper .
 then will come after thata year in which the people will have abundant water , and in which they will press . 
you have fulfilled what you were commanded to do in your dream .  thus do we reward the righteous ones .
when allah saith : o jesus , son of mary ! remember my favour unto thee and unto thy mother ; how i strengthened thee with the holy spirit , so that thou spakest unto mankind in the cradle as in maturity ; and how i taught thee the scripture and wisdom and the torah and the gospel ; and how thou didst shape of clay as it were the likeness of a bird by my permission , and didst blow upon it and it was a bird by my permission , and thou didst heal him who was born blind and the leper by my permission ; and how thou didst raise the dead by my permission ; and how i restrained the children of israel fromthee when thou camest unto them with clear proofs , and those of them who disbelieved exclaimed : this is naught else than mere magic ;
or bethink those who work ill deeds that they shall outstrip us ? lll do they judge !
who created me and who guides me ;
such are the bounds of allah . he who obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens underneath which rivers flow . that is a great wining .
god has sent this glad news to comfort your hearts . victory is in the hands of god alone . god is majestic and all-wise .
andthose to whom we have given thescripture rejoice at what has been revealed to you , , but among thefactions are those who deny part of it . say ,  i have only been commanded to worship allah and not associatewith him . to him i invite , and to him is my return . 
these are only awaiting for a single cry , to which there is no delay .
you approach men and waylay them on the road and commit depravities within your gatherings .  but his people 's only reply was ,  bring down god 's punishment upon us , if what you say be true . 
those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , he will render their deeds vain .
thereupon we delivered him and those who were with him in the laden ark .
and most of mankind will not believe even if you desire it eagerly .
verily they behold it afar off .
there is no doubt that in the hereafter they will be the losers .
and they say : when will this promise be fulfilled , if ye are truthful ?
and if those who disbelieve fight against you , they certainly would have turned their backs , then they would have found neither a walinor a helper .
for the rejecters we have prepared chains , yokes , and a blazing fire .
and if they belie you , so were messengers belied before you . and to allah return all matters .
that we will change you and cause you to grow again in a way you do not know .
andlout ! when he said to his people . do you commit al-fahishahwhile you see ? 
his are the high-sailed vessels in deep ocean like the mountains .
and when it is said unto them : prostrate yourselves unto the compassionate , they say : and what is the compassionate ? shall we prostrate ourselves unto that which thou commandest us ? and it increaseth in them aversion .
now , we have sent down to you a book in which is your remembrance . will you not understand ?
and indeed nuhinvoked us , and we are the best of those who answer .
lo ! those who distort our revelations are not hid from us . is he who is hurled into the fire better , or he who cometh secure on the day of resurrection ? do what ye will . lo ! he is seer of what ye do .
your wives are a place of sowing of seed for you , so come to your place of cultivation however you wish and put forthfor yourselves . and fear allah and know that you will meet him . and give good tidings to the believers .
they are deaf , dumb , and blind , so they return not .
this is because they accepted the faith and then rejected it . god has sealed their hearts , thus , they do not have any understanding .
verily , this quran guides to that which is most just and right and gives glad tidings to the believers . who work deeds of righteousness , that they shall have a great reward .
therefore leave them , involved in their indecencies and play , till they confront their day which they are promised .
surely men love what hastes away and forget the grievous day .
in a nearby land , but they , after their defeat , will be victorious
if they could find a refuge or cave or a place to enter into , they would certainly have turned thereto , running away in all haste .
and those who bear the load ,
saying ,  go to the pharaoh . he has transgressed beyond all bounds .
 the wall belonged to two young orphans in the town whose father had been a righteous man , and a treasure of theirs lay underneath it . so your lord wanted them to come of age and then to dig up their treasure as a mercy from him . i did not doof my own accord . that is the explanation of the things about which you were not able to restrain yourself . 
this will indeed be great happiness .
and we caused a pumpkin tree to grow over him .
and when he reached it , he was called by name : o moses !
if they had observed the torah and the gospel and that which was revealed unto them from their lord , they would surely have been nourished from above them and from beneath their feet . among them there are people who are moderate , but many of them are of evil conduct .
when the seas swarm over ,
do they think that because we have granted them abundance of wealth and sons ,
and when their apostles came unto them with evidences , they exulted in the knowledge which was with them , and there surrounded them that which they had been mocking .
as to the righteous , they will be in the midst of gardens and springs ,
and a few from the later generations .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then will they swear unto him as theyswear unto you , and they will fancy that they have some standing . lo ! is it not they who are the liars ?
then let him summon his council ,
and they have planned a very great plan .
they will become subject to punishment because of their injustice . thus , they will not speak .
and on that day we shall bring hell into view visibly for the faithless .
we destroyed generations before you when they did evil.their messengers came to them with clear verses they would not believe ; so we recompense the sinning nation .
no one can defend him against god , the lord of the exalted positions .
he brings forth the living from the dead , and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after it is dead ; even so you shall be brought forth .
that ye serve none , save allah . lo ! i fear for you the retribution of a painful day .
and let nothing keep thee back from the signs of allah after they have been revealed to thee : and inviteto thy lord , and be not of the company of those who join gods with allah .
their possessions and children will not avail them in any way against allah . they shall be the inmates of the fire and they shall remain in it .
is thereinthat an oathfor one of perception ?
and if allah were to seize mankind for their wrong-doing , he would not leave on ita single movingcreature , but he postpones them for an appointed term and when their term comes , neither can they delay nor can they advance it an hour .
allah – none is worthy of worship , except him , he is aliveand the upholder .
surely , in that there is a sign . yet most of them do not believe .
and his kindred who sheltered him ,
have they a share in god 's kingdom ? if they did , they would not give others so much as the groove of a date stone .
they said : ' o noah , you have disputed , and disputed too much , with us . bringupon us that which you promised us , if what you say is true '
indeed , that is how we deal with the guilty .
therein are maidens of modest gaze , whom neither a man nor a jinn had ever touched before them .
glory be to him who created pairs of all things , of what the earth grows , and of their kind and of what they do not know .
and a tongue and two lips ,
to warn whoever is alive and justify the word against the disbelievers .
if you do not help him , allah will help him as he helped him when he was driven out with one otherby the unbelievers . when the two were in the cave , he said to his companion : 'do not sorrow , allah is with us ' then allah caused his tranquilityto descend upon him and supported him with legionsyou did not see , and he made the word of the unbelievers the lowest , and the word of allah is the highest . allah is mighty , wise .
he that doeth good shall have ten times as much to his credit : he that doeth evil shall only be recompensed according to his evil : no wrong shall be done untothem .
or am ibetter than this one who is insignificant and hardly makes himself clear ?
those who , when they spend , are not extravagant and not niggardly , but hold a justbetween those ;
and when moses said unto his people : lo ! allah commandeth you that ye sacrifice a cow , they said : dost thou make game of us ? he answered : allah forbid that i should be among the foolish !
but as for him who is given his book in his left hand , he shall say , 'would that i had not been given my book
their desire was to outwit him , but we made them to be the humiliated .
they said : 'if he is a thief know then that a brother of his has committed theft before him ' but joseph kept it secret and did not reveal it to them . he said : 'you are in a worse position . and allah knows well what you describe '
or do the inhabitants of the villages feel secure from our might coming to them in the midmorning while they play ?
those who called shu'ayb a liar were destroyed as though they never existed . they certainly were the ones to lose a great deal .
impure women are for impure men and impure men for impure women , and pure women are for pure men and pure men for pure women . they are free from those scandals which the slanderers utter . there is forgiveness for them and honourable provision .
giving glad tidingsand fears allah muchand loves allah much ] , and warning , but most of them turn away , so they listen not .
they said : bring him then before the eyes of the people , haply they may bear witness .
those who disbelieved will say , “ our lord , show us those who led us astray—among jinn and humans—and we will trample them under our feet , so they become among of the lowest . ”
o you who believe ! if you obey a party of those who were given the scripture , they will turn you , after your belief , into disbelievers .
or do you ask of them any tribute ? in that case the tribute of your lord is better , for he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss ;
if thou askest them , 'who created you ? ' they will say , 'god . ' how then are they perverted ?
then , what can make you know what is the day of recompense ?
and follow what is revealed to you from your lord ; surely allah is aware of what you do ;
for you is your religion , and for me is mine .
say , ‘ if the abode of the hereafter were exclusively for you with allah , and not for other people , then long for death , should you be truthful . ’
and it shall avert the chastisement from her if she testify four times , bearing allah to witness that he is most surely one of the liars ;
tell them , : “ i am nothing but a warner . there is no deity but allah , the one , the supreme ,
these are the signs of allah , which we recite for you in truth , and you are indeed one of the apostles .
and marry not woman whom your fathers married , except what has already passed ; this surely is indecent and hateful , and it is an evil way .
fleeing from a lion ?
and made therein much mischief .
then they found one from among our servants whom we had granted mercy from us and whom we had taught knowledge from ourselves .
and set the moon therein for a light and the sun for a lamp ?
they come down to every mendacious sinner ,
ask those of our messengers whom we sent before you ,  did we ever appoint gods to be worshipped besides the beneficent one ? 
and how could ye take it when ye have gone in unto each other , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
such are the signs of allah , which we rehearse to thee in truth ; then in what exposition will they believe afterallah and his signs ?
make my task easy for me .
truly , those who accuse chaste , unwary , believing women are cursed in this world and the hereafter . for them awaits a terrible chastisement .
they said :  we wish to eat thereof and to be stronger in faith , and to know that you have indeed told us the truth and that we ourselves be its witnesses . 
and those who were but followers will say : if a return were possible for us , we would disown them even as they have disowned us . thus will allah show them their own deeds as anguish for them , and they will not emerge from the fire .
so we took vengeance on them , and drowned them in the sea for rejecting our signs and not heeding them .
lo ! they fold up their breasts that they may conceal themselves from him . surely when they cover themselves up with their garments allah knows well what they cover and what they reveal . indeed he even knows the secrets hidden in the breasts .
those who believe in god and his messenger are the truthful ones and are witnessbefore their lord . they will have their reward and their light . those who disbelieve and reject our revelations shall be the dwellers of hell .
'ad also gave the lie . so how awesome were my chastisement and my warnings !
surely thus do we reward the doers of good .
“ o zechariah , we give you good news of a son , whose name is john , a name we have never given before . ”
nor are you worshippers of what i worship .
proclaim , “ it is allah who gives you life , then will give you death , then will gather you all on the day of resurrection in which there is no doubt , but most people do not know . ”
and whoever does evil or acts unjustly to his soul , then asks forgiveness of allah , he shall find allah forgiving , merciful .
that day will be the sure reality : therefore , whoso will , let him take areturn to his lord !
remember also the time when your lord declared , 'if you are grateful , i will surely bestow more favours on you ; but if you are ungrateful , then know that my punishment is severe indeed . ' 
o men , a proof has now come to you from your lord ; we have sent down to you a manifest light .
and we placed therein gardens of palm trees and grapevines and caused to burst forth therefrom some springs -
make thou the ark under our eyes , and as we reveal ; and address me not concerning those who have done evil ; they shall be drowned . '
verily those who dispute regarding the signs of allah without any evidence that might have come to them , nothing but vain pride fills their hearts . yet they shall never be able to satisfy the pride with which they are puffed up . so seek refuge with allah . verily he is all-hearing , all-seeing .
by the dawnraiders ,
o you who believe ! violate not the sanctity of the symbols of allah , nor of the sacred month , nor of the animals brought for sacrifice , nor the garlanded people or animals , etc.for their security ] , nor the people coming to the sacred house , seeking the bounty and good pleasure of their lord . but when you finish the ihram , you may hunt , and let not the hatred of some people instopping you from al-masjid-al-haramlead you to transgression . help you one another in al-birr and at-taqwa ; but do not help one another in sin and transgression . and fear allah . verily , allah is severe in punishment .
whereupon the quake overtook them , and they became lifeless bodies in their homes .
let all workers work for the like of this !
proclaim , “ just show me your partnerswhom you worship other than allah ; show me which part of the earth have they created – or do they have any share in the heavens ? ” or have we given them some book , so they are on its clear proofs ? in fact the unjust do not give promises to each other , except of deceit .
attention : indeed to allah belongs everyone that is in the heavens and in the earth . those who call upon associates , other than allah , follow nothing but assumptions , only lying .
even then we revived you after you had become senseless that you might give thanks ;
and if you reject , nations before you did indeed reject ; and nothing is incumbent on the apostle but a plain delivering .
they shall be cursed from all around and they shall be ruthlessly killed wherever they are seized .
iblis ' made his guess true to them ; and all except for a party of believers followed him .
and he who created the male and the female .
surely those who say , our lord is allah , then they continue on the right way , they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve .
which only the sinners eat  .
and let not the disbelievers think that our postponing of their punishment is good for them . we postpone the punishment only so that they may increase in sinfulness . and for them is a disgracing torment .
those who have avoided worshipping idols and have turned in repentance to god will receive the glad news .
so you persevere with patience . the promise of god is true . whether we show you some of the punishment we have promised them , or gather you up in death , they have to come back to us .
how many a city we have destroyed in its evildoing , and now it is fallen down upon its turrets ! how many a ruined well , a tall palace !
nay , but that which they have earned is rust upon their hearts .
'for four months you shall journey freely in the land . but know that you shall not render allah incapable , and that allah will humiliate the unbelievers '
when they entered upon david , and he was startled by them . they said , “ do not fear . two disputants ; one of us has wronged the other ; so judge between us fairly , and do not be biased , and guide us to the straight way . ”
—those who believed in our signs and had been muslims .
which of you is the afflicted .
and moses said , “ even if you are ungrateful , together with everyone on earth—god is in no need , worthy of praise . ”
their prayers in it will be , “ purity is to you , o allah ” and their greetings in it will be , “ peace ” ; and the conclusion of their prayers is , “ all praise is to allah , the lord of the creation . ”
saad . by the renowned quran .
they shall abide in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , unless your lord may will otherwise . surely your lord does whatsoever he wills .
and indeed it is we who give life and it is we who cause death , and we are the inheritors .
say : then allah 's is the conclusive argument ; so if he please , he would certainly guide you all .
those to whom we have given the scriptures know this as they know their own sons . but those who have ruined their souls will not believe .
he said : verily he saith , verify she should be a cow unyoked , not broken to till the ground or to water the field , whole , and without blemish in her . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . then they slaughtered her , and they were wellnigh not doing it .
then we revealed to moses : 'strike the sea with your staff ' , so it divided and each part was as a mighty mount .
and surely your lord will gather them together ; surely he is wise , knowing .
do not obey the order of the wasteful ,
their children and their wealth will avail them nothing against allah . they will bedwellers of the fire , to dwell therein forever .
or do they envy the people for what god has given them of his grace ? we have given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and we have given them a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the revelations of their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
'god has begotten ? ' they are truly liars .
so they shall on that day be sharers in the chastisement one with another .
muhammadis not the father of any man among you , but he is the messenger of allah and the lastof the prophets . and allah is ever allaware of everything .
say ,  indeed , i am simply one who warns . 
the tribes of thamud and a ’ ad denied the event of great dismay .
there were surely signs in this ; we will surely put you to the test .
moses came to you with clear signs , but in his absence you worshipped the calf and became wrongdoers . 
and when they are thrown into a narrow place therein bound in chains , they will cry out thereupon for destruction .
“ so eat , and drink , and be consoled . and if you see any human , say , ‘ i have vowed a fast to the most gracious , so i will not speak to any human today . ' “
and if you chastise , chastise even as you have been chastised ; and yet assuredly if you are patient , better it is for those patient .
eyes do not encompass him – and all eyes are within his domain * ; he is the most subtle , the fully aware .
he said :  as for himwho does wrong , we shall punish him ; and then he will be brought back unto his lord ; who will punish him with a terrible torment .
in his hands are the keys of the treasuries of the heavens and the earth . those who reject god 's revelations will be lost .
and it will be said ,  today we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours , and your refuge is the fire , and for you there are no helpers .
to him belongs whosoever dwells in the heavens and on earth . thosethat are with him neither disdain to serve him out of pride , nor do they weary of it .
are you more difficult to create or the heavens ? he built it ,
and in the heaven is your providence and that which ye are promised ;
when they are flung therein they hear its roaring as it boileth up ,
do not be like those who turned into quarrelling sects after receiving clear authoritative evidence . they will suffer a great torment .
and they intended for him a plan , but we made them the most debased .
those in the fire will say to the warders of hell :  ask your lord to reduce the punishment by a day for us . 
but god blessed us , and spared us the agony of the fiery winds .
they fear their lord above them and do what they are commanded .
and thisis a blessed book which we have sent down , confirmingwhich came before it , so that you may warn the mother of townsand all those around it . those who believe in the hereafter believe in , and they are constant in guarding their salat .
that we may substitute others like unto you and produce you into that which ye know not .
and when the heaven is torn away .
say :  no reward do i ask of you for this , nor am i a pretender .
and it certainly is a guide and a mercy to those who believe .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no allah save allah , the one , the absolute ,
if allah touch thee with affliction , there is none that can relieve therefrom save him , and if he touch thee with good fortune ; for he is able to do all things .
for fuqara , who in allah 's cause are restricted , and can not move about in the land . the one who knows them not , thinks that they are rich because of their modesty . you may know them by their mark , they do not beg of people at all . and whatever you spend in good , surely allah knows it well .
and they invented a relationship between him and the jinn . but the jinn know that they will be arraigned .
those who were left rejoiced at their staying behind the apostle of allah , and they detested to strive hard with their riches and their lives in the way of allah , and they said : march not forth in the heat . - say thou : hotter still is the hell-fire . would that they understood !
had it been our will we would have made angels among you as successors in the earth .
the leaders of the people who were unbelievers , replied :  we see that you are but a man like us , and see that none among us follows you but the meanest and immature of judgement , and do not see any excellence in you above us . in fact , we think you are a liar . 
whoever reaches old age , we reverse in natural disposition . do they not have sense ?
saying : 'you used to come to us from the right hand '
the day they see it , it will seem they had stayed in the world but only an evening or its turning into dawn .
their messengers said to them : 'we are nothing except humans like you . but allah bestows his mercy on those of his worshipers whom he chooses . we can not give you proof , except with the permission of allah . in allah , let believers put their trust .
i am certainly not one to drive away the believers .
these are they for whom there is not in the hereafter save the fire ; to naught shall come that which they have performed , and vain is that which they have been working
should he not know what he created ? and he is the subtile , the aware .
lo ! he is one of our believing slaves .
and the bedouins came with their excuses , asking for leave ; those who lied to god and his messenger tarried ; there shall befall the unbelievers of them a painful chastisement .
their apostles said to them :  indeed we are men like you , but god bestows his favours on whomsoever he wills among his creatures . it is not in our power to bring a miracle for you without the leave of god . the believers should only place their trust in god .
by thy lord , we will question them all .
the example of the devil – when he said to man “ disbelieve ” ; so when he has rejected faith , he says , “ i am unconcerned with you – indeed i fear allah , the lord of the creation . ”
and those who believe and whose offspring follow them in faith , to them shall we join their offspring , and we shall not decrease the reward of their deeds in anything . every person is a pledge for that which he has earned .
to him belongs whoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who pray regularly and pay obligatory alms and have firm faith in the hereafter .
lo ! those who disbelieve and turn from the way of allah and oppose the messenger after the guidance hath been manifested unto them , they hurt allah not a jot , and he will make their actions fruitless .
“ i only convey the commands from allah , and his messages ; and whoever disobeys the commands of allah and his noble messenger – then indeed for him is the fire of hell , in which they will remain for ever and ever . ”
and consider what time they will wrangle together in the fire , and the oppressed will say unto those who were stiff-necked : verily we have been unto you a following , are ye going to avail us against a portion of the fire ?
lo ! thy lord is surely one ;
if it had been allah 's plan , they would not have taken false gods : but we made thee not one to watch over their doings , nor art thou set over them to dispose of their affairs .
and when the garden is brought nigh ,
arrogance in the land and their plotting of evil . but the evil plot encompasses only him who makes it . then , can they expect anything , but the sunnahof the peoples of old ? so no change will you find in allah 's sunnah , and no turning off will you find in allah 's sunnah .
is he then who watches every soul as to what it earns ? and yet they give associates to allah ! say : give them a name ; nay , do you mean to inform him of what he does not know in the earth , orby an outward saying ? rather , their plans are made to appear fair-seeming to those who disbelieve , and they are kept back from the path ; and whom allah makes err , he shall have no guide .
he is a person who has been seized with a little madness ; so wait for a while . 
the jews say ezra is the son of allah , while the christianssay the messiah is the son of allah . such are their assertions , by which they imitate those who disbelieved before . allah fights them ! how perverted are they !
and our duty is no more than to clearly convey the message . ”
“ and that ‘ set your face straight * for religion , apart from all others ; and never be of those who ascribe partners ’ . ”
“ but i just say that only allah is my lord , and i do not ascribe anyone as a partner to my lord . ”
then his lord had mercy on him , accepted his repentance and guided him .
write for us what is good in this life and in the everlasting life . to you alone we turn ' he replied : ' i will smite with my punishment whom i will ; yet my mercy embraces all things . i will write itto those who are cautious , give the obligatory charity , and believe in our verses ;
and that he may punish the munafiqun , men and women , and also the mushrikun men and women , who think evil thoughts about allah , for them is a disgraceful torment , and the anger of allah is upon them , and he has cursed them and prepared hell for them , and worst indeed is that destination .
there are great signs in this for those endowed with intelligence .
the child cried out :  verily i am allah 's servant . he has granted me the book and has made me a prophet
and when our messengers came unto lot , he was troubled upon their account , for he could not protect them ; but they said : fear not , nor grieve ! lo ! we are to deliver thee and thy household , save thy wife , who is of those who stay behind .
hast thou not seen how that god has sent down out of heaven water and threaded it as springs in the earth , then he brings forth therewith crops of diverse hues , then they wither , and thou seest them turning yellow , then he makes them broken orts ? surely in that is a reminder for men possessed of minds .
and the devils pull those who their brothers into error , and then do not make any relaxation .
o prophet ! when yeput away women , put them away for theirperiod and reckon the period , and keep your duty to allah , your lord . expel them not from their houses nor let them go forth unless they commit open immorality . such are the limitsallah ; and whoso transgresseth allah 's limits , he verily wrongeth his soul . thou knowest not : it may be that allah will afterward bring some new thing to pass .
to you your religion , and to me my religion ! '
and watch them , and they soon shall see !
indeed , allah does not do injustice , as much as an atom 's weight ; while if there is a good deed , he multiplies it and gives from himself a great reward .
aaron had said to them before , “ o my people , you are being tested by this . and your lord is the merciful , so follow me , and obey my command . ”
does not man see that we created him from a drop offluid , and , behold , he is an open contender ! ?
and if you die or are killed , even so it is to god that you will return .
nor can you lead the blind out of their error . you can make only those hear you who believe in our signs and have submitted .
except for those who repent and believe and do good deeds . god will change the evil deeds of such people into good ones : he is most forgiving and most merciful .
and pray forgiveness of god ; surely god is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the eye turned not aside nor yet was overbold .
and we admitted him to our mercy : for he was one of the righteous .
i come to fulfillof the torah which preceded me and to make lawful for you some of what was forbidden to you and i come to you with a sign from your lord . so fear god and obey me .
and those who believe , and do righteous deeds , we shall surely acquit them of their evil deeds , and shall recompense them the best of what they were doing .
until , when death comes to one * of them , he says , “ o my lord , send me back ! ”
say :  shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their deeds ? -
and we established for him a good name among posterity .
that is because they hated what allah revealed , so he rendered their deeds null .
o ye who believe ! call in remembrance the favour of allah unto you when certain men formed the design to stretch out their hands against you , butheld back their hands from you : so fear allah . and on allah let believers puttheir trust .
it is he who has joined the two seas ; one palatable and sweet , the other bitterly salty and has established a barrier between them as a partition .
said ,  let it be a binding contract between us and i shall be free to serve for any of the said terms . god will bear witness to our agreement . 
did he not make their treacherous plan go astray ?
on the day when he gathers them all together , then say to the angels , “ was it you these used to worship ? ”
and some faces , that day , will be sad and dismal ,
but they said , ‘ muddled dreams ! ’ ‘ indeed , he has fabricated it ! ’ ‘ indeed , he is a poet ! ’ ‘ let him bring us a sign , like those sent to the former generations . ’
“ therefore journey with your household while a portion of the night remains , and you tread behind them – and none of you may turn around and see , and proceed directly to the place you are commanded to . ”
and warn themof the day of grief and regrets , when the case has been decided , whilethey are in a state of carelessness , and they believe not .
andbuilt over you the seven firmaments ,
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , and weariness did not even touch us .
o ye who believe ! if ye obey a party of those who have received the scripture they will make you disbelievers after your belief .
they think the allied tribes have not withdrawn ; and if the allied tribes had advanced they would have wished that they were rather with the arabs of the desert asking news of you ; and had they been among you they would have fought but just a little .
and when full-term she-camels are neglected
when passing by them , they would wink at one another
 and squat not on every road , breathing threats , hindering from the path of allah those who believe in him , and seeking in it something crooked ; but remember how ye were little , and he gave you increase . and hold in your mind 's eye what was the end of those who did mischief .
then they even solicited his guests from him , whereupon we blotted out their eyes , : “ now have a taste of my chastisement and my warnings . ”
then surely the hell , that is the abode .
 and i have chosen you . so listen to that which is inspired to you .
those who believe and do good , surely they are the -best of men .
the food of the sinner .
so do not let yourself be distracted from it by those who do not believe in it and who follow their desires , or you will perish . ’
and his offspring ! them we made the survivors .
verily , for the muttaqun , there will be a success ;
that is part of that wisdom which thy lord hath revealed unto thee , and set not up thou along with allah anot her god , lest thou be cast into hell , reproved , rejected .
that they would certainly be assisted ,
and those who witness not falsehood , and when they pass by some vanity pass by with dignity .
we helped him against people who rejected our signs : truly they were a people given to evil : so we drowned themall together .
they used to say before :
my believing servants , my land is vast . worship me alone .
those are their houses , all fallen down because of the evil they committed ; surely in that is a sign for a people who have knowledge .
we will relate to thee the fairest of stories in that we have revealed to thee this koran , though before it thou wast one of the heedless .
the twain said : o our lord ! verily we fear that he may hasten against us or wax exorbitant .
and there is not a thing , but with us are the stores thereof . and we send it not down except in a known measure .
she was told to enter the palace . when she saw it , she thought that it was a pool and raised her clothe up to her legs . solomon said ,  this is a palace constructed with glass .  she said ,  my lord , indeed i have wronged myself and i submit myself with solomon to the will of god , the lord of the universe . 
under the shadow of thick black smoke
this is nothing but the word of a mortal ! 
those villages we narrate their news to you . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , yet they would not believe what they had belied before ; as such allah seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
but those who believe and do deeds of righteousness , we shall soon admit to gardens , with rivers flowing beneath , - their eternal home : therein shall they have companions pure and holy : we shall admit them to shades , cool and ever deepening .
believers , obey allah and his messenger and never let your labors go in vain !
he will say : ah , would that i had sent before mefor my life !
certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of humanity , but most people do not know .
andthe devils- every builder and diver
and when the earth brings forth its burdens
they shall call out : “ o malik , let your lord put an end to us. ” he will reply : “ you must stay on in it .
and afterward he will be repaid for it with fullest payment ;
he said : “ my lord , forgive me and bestow upon me a kingdom such as none other after me will deserve . surely you are the bounteous giver . ”
say ,  look at whateverin heavens and on earth .  but signs and warnings do not benefit the unbelievers .
and give the women their dowries as a gift spontaneous ; but if they are pleased to offer you any of it , consume it with wholesome appetite .
therefore take this , andallah will weaken the scheme of the disbelievers .
had they been content with that which allah and his messenger had given them and had said : allah sufficeth us . allah will give us of his bounty , andhis messenger . unto allah we are suppliants .
then the fish swallowed him , and he was to blame .
but those who denied the truth , they shall be told : “ were my signs not rehearsed to you ? but you waxed proud and became a guilty people . ”
yet they say :  when will this decree come , if you speak the truth ? 
 so i fled from you when i feared you . but my lord has granted me hukman , and appointed me as one of the messengers .
some of them appear to be listening to you ; but can you make the deaf hear , incapable as they are of understanding ?
allah has made the ka'bah , the sacred house , standing for the people andthe sacred months and the sacrificial animals and the garlands . that is so you may know that allah knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth and that allah is knowing of all things .
and there shall be wide-eyed maidens ,
only god who has created the heavens , the earth , darkness , and light deserves all praise . the disbelievers consider other things equal to him .
i did not make them witnesses of the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor of the creation of their own souls ; nor could i take those who leadastray for aiders .
are they looking for the angels to come down or the order of your lord to come ? as such did those who have gone before them . allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves ,
the truth comes from your lord so do not be among the doubters .
there is naught but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and we shall not be raised .
do not wish for the bounty which allah has preferred one of you above another . for men is a share of what they earn , and for women is a share of what they earn . ask allah of his bounty . allah has knowledge of all things .
have you not seen those who were told : 'restrain you hands , and establish the prayer , and pay the zakah ' ? but when fighting was enjoined upon them some of them feared men as one should fear allah , or even more , and said : 'our lord , why have you ordained fighting for us ? why did you not grant us a little more respite ? ' say to them : 'there is little enjoyment in this world . the world to come is much better for the god-fearing . and you shall not be wronged even to the extent of the husk of a date-stone .
“ o abraham , refrain from this . the command of your lord has come ; they have incurred an irreversible punishment . ”
and we made themof the past and an example to later ages .
he gives you an example from your own life : do you possess among your dependants any partners in what we have bestowed on you , so that you and they have equalin it , and that you fear them as you fear each other ? that is how we explain our signs clearly for those who comprehend .
people of the book ! why do you dispute concerning abraham ? the torah was not sent down , neither the gospel , but after him . what , have you no reason ?
and that which she used to worship beside god had stopped her ; for she came of a disbelieving people .
on the day when some faces will bewhite , and some faces will beblack : to those whose faces will be black , :  did ye reject faith after accepting it ? taste then the penalty for rejecting faith . 
andwhen we made the house a place of return for the people andsecurity . and take , , from the standing place of abraham a place of prayer . and we charged abraham and ishmael , ,  purify my house for those who perform tawaf and those who are stayingfor worship and those who bow and prostrate . 
never did we destroy a population that had not a term decreed and assigned beforehand .
he certainly has the power to bring him back to life .
and those who strove in our way – we shall surely show them our paths ; and indeed allah is with the virtuous .
and all those who are in the earth – then only if the redemption saves him !
whoso makes god his friend , and his messenger , and the believers -- the party of god , they are the victors .
the like of which was never created in the land .
he therefore inwardly sensed fear of them ; they said , “ do not fear ! ” ; and they gave him the glad tidings of a knowledgeable son .
he then dared to lift his gaze .
as also others bound together in fetters .
the prophet is more caring of the believers than they are of themselves , and his wives are mothers to them . and blood-relatives are closer to one another in god ’ s book than the believers or the emigrants , though you should do good to your friends . that is inscribed in the book .
do you call on baal , and abandon the best of creators ?
they said , ‘ our lord knows that we have indeed been sent to you ,
, if they cry lies to you ; messengers before you were also cried lies to . to allah shall all matters be sent back .
our wealth is of no benefit to us
indeed , we thus reward the doers of good .
see , the inhabitants of paradise today are busy in their rejoicing ,
“ in fact , we were unfortunate ! ”
allah it is who made the night so that you may seek repose in it , and made the day radiant . surely allah is most bounteous to people ; but most people do not give thanks .
with a revelation sent down by the mighty one , the merciful ,
thus did we make their case known to the people , that they might know that the promise of allah is true , and that there can be no doubt about the hour of judgment . behold , they dispute among themselves as to their affair.said ,  construct a building over them  : their lord knows best about them : those who prevailed over their affair said ,  let us surely build a place of worship over them . 
my authority has left me . ’
and i do not know if this is a trial for you and an enjoyment for a time '
so god struck him with the torment of this life and the life hereafter .
it is he who stretched out the earth and placed upon it firm mountains and rivers . and of all fruits , he has put in it two pairs and drew the veil of night over the day . surely , in these there are signs for a nation who think .
so those on the right hand , who will be those on the right hand ? .
all this was done as a means of enjoyment for you and your cattle .
those who perform the prayer , and expend of what we have provided them ,
prescribed for you when death approachesone of you if he leaves wealtha bequest for the parents and near relatives according to what is acceptable - a duty upon the righteous .
indeed , those who fear their lord unseen will have forgiveness and great reward .
god was kind to the prophet , the emigrants , and the helpers of the faithful who followed him in the hour of distress . when a section of them were about to lose courage he turned to them in his mercy , for he is compassionate and kind .
indeed , they denied the truth when it came to them ; so they are now in a perplexed state of affairs .
certainly he saw of the greatest signs of his lord .
and when regret overcame them and they saw that they had gone astray , they said ,  if our lord does not have mercy upon us and forgive us , we will surely be among the losers . 
butbefore them , who denied , - the people of noah , and the confederatesafter them ; and every people plotted against their prophet , to seize him , and disputed by means of vanities , therewith to condemn the truth ; but it was i that seized them ! and howwas my requital !
he it is who sends down clear signs to his servant so as to bring you out from darkness into light . surely allah is most kind and most compassionate to you .
why is it that , whenever they make a covenant , some of them cast it aside ? most of them do not believe .
and who spend the night prostrating and standing , for their lord .
and recallwhen your lord brought forth descendants from the loins of the sons of adam , and made them witnesses against their ownselves . asking them : 'am i not your lord ? ' they said : 'yes , we do testify . ' we did so lest you claim on the day of resurrection : 'we were unaware of this . '
therein of every fruit two kinds --
will you be left secure in what is here ?
after we die and become dust and bones , we shall be brought to judgement ? ' 
it is not given to any soul to die except with the leave of allah , and at an appointed time . and he who desires his reward in this world , we shall grant him the reward of this world ; and he who desires the reward of the other world , we shall grant him the reward of the other world . and soon shall we reward the ones who are grateful .
prosperous are the believers ,
nor are alike those that are living and those that are dead . allah can make any that he wills to hear ; but thou canst not make those to hear who arein graves .
and when our command came to pass , we turned the town upside down , and rained on it stones of baked clay , one on another ,
we sent noah to his people , “ i am to you a clear warner . ”
these are the people of the right .
say ,  even if you turned to stones or iron ,
o ye who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and die not except in a state of islam .
when our manifest signs are recited to them , the faithless say of the truth when it comes to them : ‘ this is plain magic . ’
those who are righteous—when an impulse from satan strikes them , they remind themselves , and immediately see clearly .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there awaits the punishment of gehennaan evil arrival !
they also say :  tell us when this threat will come to pass , if you are truthful . 
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , exaltingwith praise of their lord . and it will be judged between them in truth , and it will be said ,  praise to allah , lord of the worlds . 
they said :  o powerful chief ! his father is an age-stricken man , seize one of us in his stead . we indeed consider you an excellent person . 
or some substance , which , in your minds , is even harder. ” then they will say , “ who will restore us ? ” say , “ the one who originated you the first time. ” then they will nod their heads at you , and say , “ when will it be ? ” say , “ perhaps it will be soon . ”
and the earth which splitteth
moses chose seventy men from his people for our tryst , and when the earthquake seized them , he said , ‘ my lord , had you wished , you would have destroyed them and me before . will you destroy us because of what the fools amongst us have done ? it is only your test , by which you lead astray whomever you wish and guide whomever you wish . you are our master , so forgive us and have mercy on us , for you are the best of those who forgive .
lo ! those who disbelieve in the reminder when it cometh unto them , for lo ! it is an unassailable scripture .
and they brought his shirt with false blood on it . he said , 'no ; but your spirits tempted you to do somewhat . but come , sweet patience ! and god 's succour is ever there to seek against that you describe . '
no intercession avails with him except his he allows , so that when their hearts are freed of fear , they ask :  what did your lord say ?  they will answer :  what is expedient . he is the all-mighty and supreme . 
and when musa said to his people : o my people ! remember the favor of allah upon you when he raised prophets among you and made you kings and gave you what he had not given to any other among the nations .
he said , ‘ this is a mercy from my lord . but when the promise of my lord is fulfilled , he will level it ; and my lord ’ s promise is true . ’
and as for 'aad they were destroyed by a wind , furious . roaring .
lord of the heavens and of the earth and all that is between them , and lord of the sun 's risings .
, tell them ,  people , i am giving you a clear warning .
behold ! his lord said to him :  bow :  he said :  i bowto the lord and cherisher of the universe . 
had we a reminder from those of yore ,
and say thou : the truth is come , and falsehood hath vanished ; verily falsehood is ever vanishing .
lapping it down like thirsty camels . '
and unto thamud we sent their brother saleh . he said : o my people ! worship allah ; there is no god for you but he . he hath caused you to spring out of the earth , and hath made you dwell therein . wherefore ask forgiveness of him , then repent toward him ; verily my lord is nigh , responsive .
and certainly we gave knowledge to dawood and sulaiman , and they both said : praise be to allah , who has made us to excel many of his believing servants .
indeed they were among favours before this .
has he turned so many gods into one deity ? this is indeed a strange thing ! 
but how can you disbelieve while it is you to whom the communications of allah are recited , and among you is his apostle ? and whoever holds fast to allah , he indeed is guided to the right path .
likewise , we awakened themthat they might question one another . a speaker from among them said :  how long have you stayed ?  they said :  we have stayeda day or part of a day .  they said :  your lordknows best how long you have stayed . so send one of you with this silver coin of yours to the town , and let him find out which is the good lawful food , and bring some of that to you . and let him be careful and let no man know of you .
so , when our messengers came to lot , he was worried on their account as he was unable to protect them . they said :  have no fear or regret . we will certainly save you and your family except your wife , for she is one of those who will stay behind .
those who say , “ our lord is god , ” then lead a righteous life—they have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother loutsaid to them :  will you not fear allah and obey him ?
look twice , your eyes will only become dull and tired .
and unto allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth , that he may reward those who do evil with that which they have done , and reward those who do good with goodness .
would ye question your messenger as moses was questioned of old ? but whoever changeth from faith to unbelief , hath strayed without doubt from the even way .
he replied ,  am i to trust you with him as i once trusted you with his brother ? but god is the best of guardians , the most merciful of all . 
so when her husband saw his shirt torn from the back , he said ,  indeed , it is of the women 's plan . indeed , your plan is great .
i have warned you about the fierce blazing fire
say thou : bethink ye : whatsoever ye call upon beside allah- show me whatsoever they have created of the earth ? or have they any partnership in the heavens ? bring me a book before this , or some trace of knowledges if ye say sooth .
those to whom we have given the book , know youjust as a well as they know their sons . it is certain that some of them deliberately hide the truth .
those who disbelieve say : the hour will not come unto us . say thou : yea , by my lord the knower of the unseen , it will surely come unto you . not the weight of an atom escapeth him in the heavens or in the earth ; nor is there anything less than it nor greater but it is inscribed in a luminous book
he who does a good deed will receive ten times its worth ; and he who does evil will be requited to an equal degree ; and no one will be wronged .
by the dawn when it brightens !
and morning found him in the city , fearing , vigilant , when behold ! he who had appealed to him the day before cried out to him for help . moses said unto him : lo ! thou art indeed a mere hothead .
then why do you dissimulate this revelation ?
my riches have : availed me not ;
the only response of abraham 's people was ,  kill him or burn him !  but god saved him from the fire . surely in this there are signs for people who believe .
then we sent our apostles one after the other . every time an apostle came to a people they denied him . so we made one follow the other , and turned them into bygone tales . cursed be the people who do not believe !
nay , but everyone of them desireth that he should be given open pages .
unless it be such of them who seek refuge with a people who are joined with you by a covenant , or those who come to you because their hearts shrink from fighting either against you or against their own people . had allah so willed , he would certainly have given them power over you and they would have fought against you . if they leave you alone and do not fight against you and offer you peace , , then allah does not permit you to harm them .
so ask them if they are more difficult to create , or the rest we have created ? indeedwe created from fermented clay .
and the mujrimun , shall see the fire and apprehend that they have to fall therein . and they will find no way of escape from there .
and he is the all-forgiving , the all-loving ,
thus we have sent thee among a nation before which other nations have passed away , to recite to them that we have revealed to thee ; and yet they disbelieve in the all-merciful . say : 'he is my lord -- there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust , and to him i turn . '
yet they worship instead of allah that which can neither benefit them nor hurt them . the disbeliever was ever a partisan against his lord .
nor will i worship what you worship ,
 these our people have taken for worship gods other than him : why do they not bring forward an authority clearfor what they do ? who doth more wrong than such as invent a falsehood against allah ?
then if they reject thee , so were rejected messengers before thee , who came with clear signs , books of dark prophecies , and the book of enlightenment .
hereplied : 'your meeting shall be on the day of the feast , and let the people be assembled by midmorning '
say ,  who provides for you from the heavens and the earth ?  say ,  allah . and indeed , we or you are either upon guidance or in clear error . 
and my brother aaron is more fluent than me in tongue , so send him with me as support , verifying me . indeed , i fear that they will deny me . 
he who seeks glory , let him know that all glory belongs to allah alone . to him do good words go up , and righteous action uplifts them . but those who contrive evil deeds , a severe punishment lies in store for them , and their contriving will come to naught .
and we have already sent messengers before you to their peoples , and they came to them with clear evidences ; then we took retribution from those who committed crimes , and incumbent upon us was support of the believers .
say :  to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth ?  say :  to allah . he has prescribed mercy for himself . indeed he will gather you together on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . those who destroy themselves will not believe , and muhammad saw as being one of his messengers , and in resurrection , etc . ] .
and assuredly we have destroyed your likes ; so is there any one who shall be admonished ?
we will indeed make smooth for him the path to misery ;
and the life of this world is nothing but play and amusement . but far better is the house in the hereafter for those who are al-muttaqun . will you not then understand ?
and verily ! in the cattle , there is a lesson for you . we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , from between excretions and blood , pure milk ; palatable to the drinkers .
but the blame is to be laid on those who asked permission of you whilst they are rich . they are content to remain with those who stay behind . allah has set a seal upon their hearts so they do not know .
and otherwhich you have not yet captured : allah has comprehended them , and allah has power over all things .
but howwhen the angels take their souls at death , and smite their faces and their backs ?
so we evacuated everyone who was a believer there ,
praise be to god who has sent down to his servant -- the book , which is free from any ambiguity
and if a breathof the torment of your lord touches them , they will surely cry :  woe unto us ! indeed we have been zalimun .
he said :  so , your lord said : 'that is easy for me : andto appoint him as a sign to mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecreed , . 
and indeed we gave moosa the guidance , and bequeathed the book to the descendants of israel .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and go not nigh to fornication ; surely it is an indecency and an evil way .
your ties of kindred and your children will avail you naught upon the day of resurrection . he will part you . allah is seer of what ye do .
perish the conjecturers
whoever desires the fruits of the hereafter , we shall add to his fruit . as for him who desires the fruits of this world , we shall give to him of these , but he will have no share in the hereafter .
so they set out . until , when they reached the people of a town , they asked them for food , but they refused to offer them hospitality . there they found a wall about to collapse , and he repaired it . he said , “ if you wanted , you could have obtained a payment for it . ”
they will only take heed if god so wills : he is the lord who is worthy to be feared : the lord of forgiveness .
can one who has been raised on ornaments and can not present her case coolly in a dispute
hast thou not observed those unto whom it was said ; . withhold your hands , and establish prayer and give the poor-rate ; but when thereafter fighting was prescribed unto them , lo ! there is a party of them dreading men as with the dread of allah , or with greater dread ; and they say : our lord ! why hast thou prescribed unto us fighting ! wouldst that thou hadst let us tarry a term nearby ! say thou : the enjoyment of the world is little , and the hereafter is better for him who feareth god ; and ye shall not be wronged a whit .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and allah comprehends all things .
say :  ifmost gracious had a son , i would be the first to worship . 
noah said : 'only allah will bring it upon you if he so wills , and you will be utterly unable to frustrate that .
his kin who sheltered him ,
they said , 'hood , thou hast not brought us a clear sign , and we will not leave our gods for what thou sayest ; we do not believe thee .
among them are men who molest the prophet and say ,  he isear .  say ,  he listens to what is best for you : he believes in allah , has faith in the believers , and is a mercy to those of you who believe .  but those who molest the messenger will have a grievous penalty .
if god helps you , none can overcome you , but if he withdraws his help from you , who is there who can help you besides him ? in god , then , let the believers place their trust !
so also was elias among those sent .
and cite for them the parable of the present life : it is like water that we send down from the sky ; the plants of the earth absorb it ; but then it becomes debris , scattered by the wind . god has absolute power over everything .
yet never did a prophet come to them but they mocked him .
and indeed they had been despondent earlier , before it was sent down upon them .
as to what they did .
they said :  we found our fathers worshipping them . 
oryou should say , ‘ if the book had been sent down to us , surely we would have been better-guided than them. ’ there has already come to you a manifest proof from your lord and a guidance and mercy . so who is a greater wrongdoer than him who denies the signs of allah , and turns away from them ? soon we shall requite those who turn away from our signs with a terrible punishment because of what they used to evade .
when the trumpet shall be sounded ,
has the story of moses reached thee ?
and from the evil of an envier when he envies . 
your wealth and your children are only a trial ; god 's reward is great :
those who belie our verses are deaf and dumb , in darkness . allah leaves in error whom he will , and guides to the straight path whom he pleases .
and for the disbelievers , in particular , it will not be at all easy .
and assuredly iblis found his conjecture true concerning them ; and they followed him all save a party of the believers .
 but if any have done wrong and have thereafter substituted good to take the place of evil , truly , i am oft-forgiving , most merciful .
or know they not their messenger , and so reject him ?
and we have provided therein means of living , for you and for those whom you provide notcreatures , cattle , beasts , and other animals ] .
an arabic qur'an , wherein there is no crookedness , that haply they may fear .
and there is none that walks upon the earth whose sustenance does not depend on the mercy of allah – he knows where it shall stay and where it shall be deposited ; everything is in a clearly explaining book .
they will be presented before your lord in ranks : ‘ certainly you have come to us just as we created you the first time . but you maintained that we shall not appoint a tryst for you . ’
and to lot we gave judgement and knowledge , and we saved him from the city that was committing wicked deeds . indeed , they were a people of evil , defiantly disobedient .
say :  he will give life to them who created them for the first time ! and he is the all-knower of every creation ! 
then do you feel secure thathe will not cause a part of the land to swallow you or send against you a storm of stones ? then you would not find for yourselves an advocate .
and god knows what you hide and what you disclose .
and there is none comparable unto him .
but he who says to his father and his mother , 'fie on you ! do you promise me that i shall be brought forth , when entire generations have passed away before me ' yet they supplicate to allah for help 'woe to you ! believe , surely the promise of allah is true ' then he says : 'this is nothing but fairytales of the ancients '
and otherwhich are not yet within your power , indeed allah compasses them , and allah is ever able to do all things .
he whom allah leads astray has none to protect him thereafter . you will see the harmdoers when they see the punishment saying : 'is there a way back '
and who is more unjust than one who invents a lie about allah or denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell aresidence for the disbelievers ?
and in moses . we sent him to pharaoh with a clear authority .
to you they swear by allah . in order to please you : but it is more fitting that they should please allah and his messenger , if they are believers .
he will adjust your works for you and will forgive you your sins . whosoever obeyeth allah and his messenger , he verily hath gained a signal victory .
or that he would not seize them gradually ? but indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
do they seek a judgement of the days of pagan ignorance ? but who could be a better judge than god for those who are firm in their faith ?
god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose so that every soul will be duly recompensed for its deeds without being wronged .
we divided them up into twelve tribes , each a whole community , and we revealed our will to moses , when his people asked for water , saying ,  strike the rock with your staff .  twelve springs gushed from it and each tribe knew its drinking place . we caused the clouds to draw their shadow over them and sent down for them manna and quails , saying ,  eat the good things we have given you .  they did not wrong us ; rather it was themselves they wronged .
and he set the moon in their midst for light , and he made the sun a lamp .
and because they practised usury although it had been forbidden them ; and for using others ' wealth unjustly . for those who are unbelievers among them we have reserved a painful punishment .
he said : there shall not come to you the food with which you are fed , but i will inform you both of its interpretation before it comes to you ; this is of what my lord has taught me ; surely i have forsaken the religion of a people who do not believe in allah , and they are deniers of the hereafter :
but i fear my relatives after me ; and my wife is barren . so grant me a successor as a favour from you
how many generations we have destroyed before them , who were stronger than these , insomuch that they ransacked the towns ? ! so , is there any escape ?
deemed ye then that we had created you for naught , and that ye would not be returned unto us ?
allah hath promised you abundant spoils that ye shall take , and these he hath hastened to you , and hath restrained the hands of people from you , that it may be a sign unto the believers , and that he may guide you to a straight path .
those who shall be mustered to gehenna upon their faces -- they shall be worse in place , and gone further astray from the way .
have you not seen those who claim to believe in the book which has been revealed to you and in the books revealed before you , and yet desire to submit their disputes to the judgement of taghut , whereas they had been asked to reject it . and satan seeks to make them drift far away from the right way .
and when moses decided to lay his violent hands on the man belonging to the enemy , he cried out :  moses , do you intend to kill me as you killed a person yesterday ?  you simply want to live in the land as a tyrant , and do not wish to set things right . 
so that will be the day when the excuses of the wrong-doers will not avail them , nor will they be asked to make amends .
say : 'would you teach allah what your religion is , when allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ' allah has knowledge of all things .
and if you fear treachery on the part of a people , then throw back to them on terms of equality ; surely allah does not love the treacherous .
and those who do not believe in the hereafter surely deviate from the path .
and it will be said to those who feared allah ,  what did your lord send down ?  they will say ,  good .  for those who do good in this world is good ; and the home of the hereafter is better . and how excellent is the home of the righteous -
so when they exceeded the bounds of that which they were prohibited we said unto them : be ye apes despised .
and i fled from you because i feared you . then my lord granted me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
so the intercession of the intercessors will not benefit them .
“ does he promise you that when you die and turn into dust and bones , you will be raised again ? ”
then , when he provided them with their provisions , he placed the drinking-cup in his brother ’ s saddlebag . then an announcer called out , “ o people of the caravan , you are thieves . ”
now whatever ye have been given is but a passing comfort for the life of the world , and that which allah hath is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord ,
therefore do not relax , nor call towards truce by yourself ; and it is you who will dominate ; and allah is with you , and he will never cause a loss in your deeds .
the day when they shall come forth , nothing concerning them remains hidden to allah . to whom belongs the kingdom this day ? to allah , the one , the subduer .
is that better by way of hospitality or the zaqqum tree ,
they say , ‘ why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ’ were we to send down an angel , the matter would surely be decided , and then they would not be granted any respite .
it spared naught that it reached , but made itas dust .
but the man who had been released , one of the twoand who now bethought him aftera space of time , said :  i will tell you the truth of its interpretation : send ye me . 
as reward for their deeds .
who has set up another god besides god : cast him into severe punishment  --
and of his signs is that he created you of dust ; then lo , you are mortals , all scattered abroad .
so when they came to solomon , he said ,  do you provide me with wealth ? but what allah has given me is better than what he has given you . rather , it is you who rejoice in your gift .
so that the people of the scripture may know that they are not ableanything from the bounty of allah and thatbounty is in the hand of allah ; he gives it to whom he wills . and allah is the possessor of great bounty .
hell ; they shall enter it , so evil is the resting-place .
he said , ‘ i did that when i was astray .
we said ,  go down , all of you , from here : then when guidance comes to you from me , anyone who follows my guidance will have no fear , nor will they grieve --
do you not realize that god is glorified by whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and even by the birds in formation ? each knows its prayer and its manner of praise . god knows well what they do .
others will be despondent ,
we made them leaders who invite to the fire , and on the day of resurrection they will not receive any help .
and they had planned their plan , but with allah istheir plan , even if their plan had beento do away with the mountains .
then we gave them good in the place of evil until they became many and said : distress and happiness did indeed befall our fathers . then we took them by surprise while they did not perceive .
indeed they are surely with us among the elect of the best .
we called out to him , ‘ o abraham !
thatis indeed an honourable recital .
and the two seas are not alike : this , sweet , thirst- quenching , pleasant to drink ; and that , saltish and bitter . and yet from each ye eat flesh fresh and bring forth the ornaments that ye wear . and thou seest therein ships cleaving the water , that ye may seek of his grace , and that haply ye may give thanks .
so know that there is no god but allah , and , ask protection for your fault and for the believing men and the believing women ; and allah knows the place of your returning and the place of your abiding .
but , if they repent , establish regular prayers , and practise regular charity , - they are your brethren in faith : do we explain the signs in detail , for those who understand .
and recites the name of his lord and serves with devotion .
and : o adam ! dwell you and your wife in the garden ; so eat from where you desire , but do not go near this tree , for then you will be of the unjust .
on the day when we will seizewith the most violent seizing ; surely we will inflict retribution .
those who answered allah and the messenger after the wound had afflicted them , for those of them who did good and were cautious there is a great wage .
but if you turn your backs , i have delivered to you that i was sent with unto you , and my lord will make a people other than you successors ; you will not hurt him anything . my lord is guardian over everything . '
he said , “ allah will surely bring that upon you if he wills , and you will not be able to escape . ”
“ o noble messengers , eat good clean things , and do good deeds ; i know all that you do . ”
and when our communications are recited to them , they say : we have heard indeed ; if we pleased we could say the like of it ; this is nothing but the stories of the ancients .
multiplied for him is the punishment on the day of resurrection , and he will abide therein humiliated -
and , then on the day of resurrection you shall place your dispute before your sustainer .
then will noentertain falsehood concerning its coming .
he said : get out of this , despised , driven away ; whoever of them will follow you , i will certainly fill hell with you all .
to god belongs the knowledge of the unseen in the heavens and the earth and to him do all affairs return . worship him and trust him . your lord is not unaware of what you do .
we send fertilizing winds , and then cause rain to descend from the sky , providing you abundant water to drink even though you could not have stored it up for yourselves .
they ask you for instruction . say ,  god instructs you concerning the indirect heirs . if a person dies childless but has a sister , she receives half of what he leaves , and he is her heir if she dies childless . if there are two sisters , they receive two-thirds of what he leaves . if there are brothers and sisters , the share of each male shall be that of two females . god makes things clear to you , so that you will not go astray . god has knowledge of all things . 
do they not see how we come toland and shrink its borders ? god decides , no one can reverse his decision , and he is swift in reckoning .
so they were struck by the evil consequences of what they did and were enveloped by what they used to ridicule .
that is not at all difficult for allah .
they will swear to you by god , when you turn back to them , that you may turn aside from them . so turn aside from them , for they are an abomination , and their refuge is gehenna -- a recompense for what they have been earning .
on the day when we say unto hell : art thou filled ? and it saith : can there be more to come ?
you shall not thirst , nor feel the sun 's heat . 
that he may question the truthful about their truth . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and those who race swiftly .
he said , ‘ my lord , grant me a sign. ’ said he , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to people for three days except in gestures . remember your lord much , and glorify him morning and evening . ’
a party of the people of the book said : 'believe in the morning what has been revealed to those who believe , and then deny it in the evening that they may thus retract . '
still they would say : 'our eyes were dazzled ; truly , we must have been a bewitched people '
and those messengers , some we have preferred above others ; some there are to whom god spoke , and some he raised in rank . and we gave jesus son of mary the clear signs , and confirmed him with the holy spirit . and had god willed , those who came after him would not have fought one against the other after the clear signs had come to them ; but they fell into variance , and some of them believed , and some disbelieved ; and had god willed they would not have fought one against the other ; but god does whatsoever he desires .
the originator of the heavens and the earth ; how can he possibly have a child when , in fact , he does not have a spouse ? and he has created all things ; and he knows everything .
and now that a messenger has come to them from allah confirming what was with them , some of those to whom the book was given reject the book of allah behind their backs , as though they knew nothing
and we showered a rain upon them ; so what a wretched rain for those who were warned !
and obey not the commandment of the prodigal
shall he , therefore , who is a believer , be like unto him who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelationfrom the lord of the 'alamin .
it is he who is god in heaven , and god on earth . he is the wise , the knower .
god shall mock them , and shall lead them on blindly wandering in their insolence .
and remember ishmael , elisha and dhu ' l-kifl . every one of them is among the best .
but they pursued them at sunrise .
and for things unknown , they assign a portion of the sustenance we have given them ; by allah – you will certainly be questioned regarding all that you used to fabricate .
and when they opened their goods , they found their money returned to them . they said : o our father ! whatcan we desire ? this is our property returned to us , and we will bring corn for our family and guard our brother , and will have in addition the measure of a camel ; this is an easy measure .
and if youdeny- already nations before you have denied . and there is not upon the messenger exceptclear notification .
this is what you used to doubt . ”
how many generations have we destroyed before them , who were far greater in riches and more boastful !
and human beings too , and beasts , and cattle -- diverse are their hues . from among his servants , it is only those who know that fear allah . verily allah is most mighty , most forgiving .
thus they routed them with allah ’ s will , and david killed goliath , and allah gave him kingdom and wisdom and taught him whatever he liked . were it not for allah ’ s repelling the people by means of one another , the earth would surely have been corrupted ; but allah is gracious to the world ’ s people .
believers ! believe in allah and his messenger and in the book he has revealed to his messenger , and in the book he revealed before . and whoever disbelieves in allah , in his angels , in his books , in his messengers and in the last day , has indeed strayed far away .
hesaid : 'we tempted your nation in your absence , and the samaritan has misled them into error '
say :  shall i inform you who will receive the worst chastisement from god ? they who were condemned by god , and on whom fell his wrath , and those who were turned to apes and swine , and those who worship the powers of evil . they are in the worse gradation , and farthest away from the right path . 
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : we behold thee except as a human being like us , and we behold not any follow thee except the meanest of us , by an immature opinion ; nor we behold in you any exellency over us ; nay ! we deem you liars .
and they went out betimes determined in purpose .
and left for him among the later folk :
on the day when we gather them all together , we will say to those who associated ,  where are those partners that you claimed ? 
establish worship at the two ends of the day and in some watches of the night . lo ! good deeds annul ill-deeds . this is reminder for the mindful .
then we sent our other messengers to follow their traditions . after them we sent jesus , the son of mary , to whom we gave the gospel . in the hearts of his followers we placed compassion and mercy . we did not command them to lead the monastic life . this was their own method of seeking the pleasure of god . despite this intention , they did not properly observe it . to the believers among them , we gave their reward but many of them are evil-doers .
yet wewill bring you a magic like it ! so fix a tryst between us and you , which neither we shall fail nor you , at a middle place . ’
and he turned away from them , and said : o my sorrow for yusuf ! and his eyes became white on account of the grief , and he was a repressor .
andjob , when he called to his lord ,  indeed , adversity has touched me , and you are the most merciful of the merciful . 
hosts of jinn and humans and birds were marshalled for solomon and were kept under full control .
and when they saw them , they said :  verily ! these have indeed gone astray ! 
it is we who created them , and strengthened their skeleton ; and we can replace them with others like them , whenever we will .
it may be that your lord mayshow mercy unto you ; but if ye revert , we shall revert : and we have made hell a prison for those who reject .
then there came to him one of the two women , walking shyly . she said :  verily , my father calls you that he may reward you for having wateredfor us .  so when he came to him and narrated the story , he said :  fear you not . you have escaped from the people who are zalimun . 
so the family of firaun picked him up , in order that he become their enemy and a sorrow upon them ; indeed firaun and haman and their armies were guilty .
when we do favors to the human being , he disregards it and turns away from it . when evil afflicts him , he becomes despairing .
your lord knows what is in your heart . if you are righteous , then he is indeed forgiving to those who turnin repentance .
god is he who created the domestic animals for you—some for you to ride , and some you eat .
and when it is said unto them : come unto that which allah hath revealed and unto the messenger , thou seest the hypocrites turn from thee with aversion .
say to them : “ whatever recompense i might ask of you , it shall be yours . my recompense is with allah , and he is witness over everything . ”
and they ask you about zul-qarnain . say , “ i will tell you something about him . ”
“ and make me among the inheritors of the gardens of serenity . ”
indeed allah is my lord and your lord ; so worship him . this is a straight path . ” ’
nor will they be permitted to offer excuses .
the emulous desire of abundance engrosseth you ,
“ he chooses by his mercy , whomever he wills ; and allah is the owner of great munificence . ”
how many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession avails nothing , except after god gives permission to whomever he wills , and approves ?
 will you call upon ba'land forsake the best of creators ,
can he against whom the sentence of punishment has been justified ? can you save him who is in the fire ?
and they shall say : we believe in it . and how shall the attainingbe possible to them from a distant place ?
and unto every community we appointed a ritual , that they mention the name of allah over the beast cattle wherewith he hath provided them : and your god is one god , so unto him submit . and bear thou glad tidings unto the humble-
“ and he will be a noble messenger towards the descendants of israel saying , ‘ i have come to you with a sign from your lord , for i mould a birdlike sculpture from clay for you , and i blow into it and it instantly becomes abird , by allah ’ s command ; and i heal him who was born blind , and the leper , and i revive the dead , by allah ’ s command ; and i tell you what you eat and what you store in your houses ; undoubtedly in theseis a great sign for you , if you are believers . ’
and whosoever of them should say : verily i am a god beside him , such a one we shall requite with hell ; thus we requite the wrong- doers .
say : ' i do not have the power to acquire benefits or to avert harm from myself , except by the will of allah . had i possessed knowledge of the unseen , i would have availed myself of much that is good , and no harm would have touched me . but i am only a warner and a bearer of glad tidings for a nation who believe .
proclaim his praise in the night and at the end of every prayer .
thankful for hisgraces . hechose himand guided him to a straight path .
man is never tired of praying for good , and if evil touch him , then he is despairing , hopeless .
say thou : allah delivereth you therefrom and from every pain , yet ye thereafter associate .
surely your lord is the creator of all things , the knowing .