and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
men , o people , have fear of the truth which you have created from one another . have fear of god , both men and women . have fear of god . have fear of god .
as for those who disbelieve , their deeds are like a mirage in the desert which the thirsty takes for water till he reaches it to find , and finds with him that which he can not see . and allah is swift at reckoning .
and why did you not , when you heard it , say , ‘ it is not for us to utter such a thing.you are immaculate ! this is a monstrous slander ! ’
a host routed out there of the factions .
when we said to the angels , ‘ we will not give the feeding of the two poor people on the day of resurrection , we will not be able to get the means to you on the day of resurrection , so ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ ‘ what is it that you used to be cautious ’ ? ’
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
suchjesus the son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
the word of god said to him , “ we are devoted to god . tell them , why do you not have any faith in the result of god . he has the right to do so . he alone has the power to forgive them . to him belongs the punishment in the heavens and the earth . to him you will all return .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea ; so behold how was the end of the evildoers !
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : take you habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
on that day allah will pay them in full their just recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
hell is made to blaze ,
if you punish them , then indeed they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , then indeed you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . ’
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
if god were to punish the people in the manner of what is in the earth , he would have made what is on the earth . but god is still watching and seeing his servants .
the jews say : ezra is the son of god . the christians say , the son of god is the son of god . that is what they say with their tongues before their very eyes . how perverse they are !
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they lied .
he said : nay , cast ye down . then lo ! their cords and their staves were made to appear to him by their magic as though they were running .
he said , ‘ get down , both of you , from here , as enemies to one another . then if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be unhappy .
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
and recall what time we delivered you from the folk of fir'awn who were visiting you with evil torment , slaying your sons and letting your women live ; and therein was a tremendous trial from your lord .
so he went before his brother , before the brothers of his absence . then he received the story of his brother , and he gave him the same way . thus , we did make him the exalted ones , the lord of the universe .
so they cast their ropes and their staffs , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
and if this is in the scripture on the earth , you would not be obedient to the land , but it will be fixed , and the day on which the command will be cut open , and the command on that day will be made clear for the people of this book .
and we know that we can not frustrate allah in the earth , nor can we escape him by flight .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is informed and observant about his servants .
and even if we opened unto them a gate of heaven and they kept mounting through it ,
when the sun is wrapped up
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
verily we are about to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a torment from the sky because they are evil-livers .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not present when they agreed upon their plan , scheming .
a provision for you and your cattle .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . he answered , god says she should be neither too old nor too old , but in between , so do as you are commanded .
they will live therein forever . what an excellent abode and place of stay .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” and their lord revealed to them : “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may remember .
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and thosesailing with ease
when the earth will suddenly shake with a terrible shaking ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
they will live amid the scorching ,
when he came to that , they will say , “ we can never believe in our deities until the messengers came to us , and god knows what is in the hearts ; and he is the sinners . ”
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the holy mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ;
he said , ‘ so it is . your lord will say , ‘ it is easy for me , and we will make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecided . ’
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
say : who is it that could be a sign at the fact of one word is revealed to you , if he is able to do so , or who can take to themselves a mercy ? if he wills , they can not find for themselves any helper .
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from allah ’ s way , and you will have a great punishment .
when your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay . ”
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration
but he turned away with his court , and said : a magician or a madman .
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and the birds , too , gathered each obedient to him .
say : has there come unto you the good news of the book with which is sent down unto those who fear , with their lord , theirs shall be gardens whereunder the rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders ? truly , allah is the beholder of his bondmen .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
lord , make us submissive to you and of our descendants a submissive nation to you . show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are all-forgiving and all-merciful .
verily those who took the calf , anon will overtake them indignation from their lord and abasement in the life of the world . thus we requite the fabricators .
there is none who could avert it .
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter , and whatever is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
it is he who has made you see what you have been concealing , and the sun and the moon . and he made the sun and the moon to be settled . it is only he who has made the night and the day to be a respite . it is he who will grant them a prolonged time .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who defy allah are themselves involved in a plot !
and they went early in determination , able .
who creates , then makes complete ,
and theyschemed , and allah planned , and allah is the best of schemers .
so that they may understand my speech .
and when their eyes shall be turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he bestowed on us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
but speak gently to him , that haply he may be mindful , or perchance fear . '
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking the pleasure of allah ; and allah is most kind toservants .
so the evil results of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
the evildoers shall have their portion , like the portion of their fellows ; so let them not ask me to hasten on .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust like our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
they will have sheets of fire above them and sheets of fire . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond ;
has he looked to the unseen , or has he taken a promise from the most merciful ?
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled over them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah hath sealed . and such are the heedless .
and the morning as it lights up .
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
and remember we saved you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
to him you attend ;
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
and whosoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , shall enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
indeed , those who recite the book of allah and establish prayer and spend out of what we have provided for them , secretly and openly , hope for a commerce that will never fail .
thinking his riches have made him immortal !
we send not down the angels , save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
you are only one one of our own . we have given you all our revelations , and we have given them their views . the matter is revealed to you . what you had done is true .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
yet different groups differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers when they see the terrible day .
he merges night into day , and he merges day into night ; and he knows best what is in the breasts .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i never took so-and-so for a friend .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance upon the guilty .
whoever thinks that god will not help him in this world and the hereafter , let him stretch a rope to the ceiling , and let him hang himself and see if his cunning eliminates what enrages him .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother , so that we may get our measure , and we will surely guard him well .
and made several preparations for him .
he said , ‘ it is so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a sinful people .
and bring up to thee allsorcerers well-versed .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
for when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were arrogant
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
blame lies on those who oppress , and terrorise the land unjustly . for such there will be a painful torment .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
when it is said to them , 'do not corrupt in the land , ' they reply , 'we are only reformers . '
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
no word have we sent down for you except that it may be in the presence of allah . but if they are wrongdoers , they will surely have to beg for your sins , and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . we were muslims prior to it . ”
and , o dear prophet , there is not a revelation in the manner of his people , but when evil is intended for them , it is only what he says . but when evil is satan 's , he is the knower of the truth , and allah is the knower , the wise .
they are the ones who put away the angels while they were unjust to themselves . they will say , “ are you the ones who have been abandoned ? ” they will say , “ we have been abandoned . ”
is he who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? it will be said to the wrong-doers , taste what you used to earn .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives or punishes whomever he wants . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers , and you have passed away , then give those whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
which will overspread the hearts .
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
so if they belie you , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , and his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ”
a guidance and mercy for the righteous ,
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste '
god has promised you , the promise of god is true . his words is too trying to reach your hearts until the time of judgment came to him . the matter is a result of their hearts . god has forgiven you , for god is munificent and bounty .
and we will surely let man see the mother of maryam , and if they are the ones of the believers , then surely , should they have been the believers . so do not be of the ones who have been given knowledge .
they said : do you wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house . indeed , he is praiseworthy , all-glorious .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
if you turn away , you are likely to make mischief in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
and when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , behold ! thy people thereat cry out .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
the dwellers in el-hijr cried lies to the envoys .
so shall we make laterfollow them .
say : allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but again you ascribe partners .
noble and pious .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his verses .
exalted and purified ,
and among people are some that are eager to be one of the other ; and if the misfortune happens to you , it is the same ; this is the truth ; and this is the very truth .
and whenever a surah is revealed : believe in allah and strive along with his messenger , the affluent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
we made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
thou art but a mortal like us . so bring a sign if thou art of the truth-tellers .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
so these their habitations lie deserted now because of their iniquities . verily in this is a sign for people who know .
have they been created by nothing , or are they their own creators ?
valuable—to warn of severe punishment from him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds that they will have a goodly reward
children of adam , when messengers of your own come to narrate to you my verses , those who are cautious and mend their ways shall have nothing to fear nor will they be grieved .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
the evidence of the book is a clear decree of god . some of them can come to the same time . god has the power to do so . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
or do they have gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
and we inspired moses : throw your stick ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
and when thou seest the art made public , they will say , as if they were the like of it , in order to be compared to it . and it is the same for such as are wont to do .
they suffered the consequences of their deeds and the end of their deeds was perdition .
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
whatever mercy allah unfolds for the people , none can withhold it ; and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
wherefore we let loose upon them a raging wind in days of evil days , that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world ; and verily the doom of the hereafter will be more shameful , and they will not be succoured .
leave them to eat and enjoy , and let them be preoccupied withhope . they will come to know .
—the day when man will remember his endeavours
so why did those whom they had chosen as gods besides allah as a means of nearness to them ? indeed , they went astray from them ; and what they used to fabricate was their lie .
sayunto those who disbelieve : ye shall be overcome and gathered unto hell , an evil resting-place .
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , the mighty , the forgiver .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things god has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
those who spend their wealth in the way of allah and then do not follow up what they spent with reminders of their generosity or with injury , their reward is with their lord ; on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
to send down upon them stones of baked clay .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
and those who made a covenant with allah after a confirmation of what was revealed to him , what is the matter with it , has been revealed to them . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
our lord , give them double the punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his bounty , and they rejoice for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
among the people are some who are bent on denying the truth , and reject the path of god . what is revealed to him is the word of god . it is they who are the people of understanding .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him for he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and that is for allah not difficult .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
then made it dry dark , flaky stubble ,
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ! say thou : verily allah sendeth astray whomsoever he will , and guideth unto himself whosoever turnoth in penitence .
on the day when he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
never think that allah will fail in his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
and when they are admonished , they pay no attention .
messengers as bearers of good news and warners , so that mankind might have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is ever mighty , wise .
nay , but they play in doubt .
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
then , when moses had determined the two of the two groups , a piece of the fire was made to overtake you by the side of the fire . so , i see the word of a burning fire .
and as for the qasitun , they shall be firewood for hell ,
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , and he of the tentpegs belied ,
and the mount of sinai ,
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
and when the word is fulfilled against them , we shall bring forth for them a beast from the earth who will speak to them because mankind had no faith in our signs .
and we raised the mount above them , and they took covenant with them , and we said to them : 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
and recall what time ye said : o musa ! we will not believe in thee till we see allah plainly . then a thunderbolt took hold of you while ye looked on .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
and the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and hymn his praise . and he is the forbearing , the forbearing .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
who sees you when you rise
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
verily , those who believeand do righteous good deeds , for them are gardens of delight .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment , and had it not been for a term appointed , the punishment would certainly have come to them . and indeed , it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of the dominion of the heavens and the wisdom . thou wilt give whomsoever thou wilt err , so that thou art of the mighty , the wise .
verily we are about to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a torment from the sky because they are evil-livers .
those who believe and do good deeds shall be forgiven and shall receive an honourable provision .
those are they of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words concerning themselves .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
as if they had never lived there . oh , away with the people of midian , just as the thamud were done away with !
and by him who created the male and female ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
surely the day of decision isappointed :
we called to him , abraham ,
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
god has promised you many spoils that you will capture . he has expedited this for you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers , and he will guide you on a straight path .
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
indeed , your lord is the best knower of two periods of the two part of the night or the night , or point on the part of the night . it is the difference of the night and the day . it is the tradition of god to make you the night and the day as a result of the law of the night . god is the most forgiving and the most merciful .
reclining on beds lined with silk brocade , the fruits of the gardens near to hand .
turn to him , and fear him , and be steadfast in prayer , and do not be of the idolaters ,
and exalted thy fame ?
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is announced to him . shall he keep it in humiliation , or bury it in the ground ? how evil is their judgement !
for every nation there is an appointed time ; then when their term is come they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
say , lord , i seek your protection against the strong temptations of the devils .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , he is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
surely what you are threatened with must come to pass and you can not escape .
they say , “ god has forged the falsehoods of god . if he wills , he will bring us a book ; and god desires to destroy the hearts of his prayers ; surely god knows the thoughts within the hearts . ”
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or any helper .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
it strips away the scalps .
assuredly allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which they proclaim . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
when the inevitable event takes place ,
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he is the all-wise , the all-aware .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they had ridiculed .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
and we rained on them a rain . and evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
we have indeed turned about for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
standall night , except a little .
two men of those who feared , whom allah had blessed , said : enter upon them by the gate , for when you enter it , you will be victorious . and put your trust in allah if you are believers .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
whose eyes were covered from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
say : o my lord ! if thou wilt shew me that wherewith they are threatened ,
the dwellers in el-hijr cried lies to the envoys .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
o the people who believe ! do not hold up the prayer , while you are made to pass away , and when you have not made a fool , even after it has come to pass , the same is what you are commanded to say . be , in the case of those who are willing to be reminded of the truth . god is the forgiver and the most merciful .
but god would not punish them while thou wast with them , nor will he punish them while they begged forgiveness .
whoever turns away from it will bear a heavy burden on the day of resurrection ,
it is he who has made the earth for you as a dwelling , and made for you the like of it . it is the like of the heavens and the earth . it is the same for you , so that you may worship god alone .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
god will certainly die and give up the life of the hearts of the faithful in what is in the hearts of god , and who remember the way of god , and who will be the greatest ones in the way of god . so who will be the greatest losers ?
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our verses .
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into the sea another time and send upon you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
and we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no authority , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember god but little ,
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so traverse its regions and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have cut out for them garments of fire . boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
and will not be removed from it .
, you were certainly in unmindfulness of this . we have removed from you your cover , so your sight today is sharp .
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith - we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not diminish unto them aught of their work . every man is for what he hath earned .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the blessing .
and who is more astray than one who callsbesides allah , such as will not answer him till the day of resurrection , and whoare unconscious of their call ?
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world . but who will plead for them with allah on the day of resurrection , or who will be their pleader ?
and those who give what they give , their hearts quaking that they are returning to their lord --
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
it is god who is the sustainer and the lord of invincible strength .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor do they pray ,
have they not seen that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them people are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
and collectand hide it .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
and worship your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
nay , but that day they shall submit ;
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , you are the ones who did not know . so go back to him , and be careful ofhim , and he is the just one who hears all and is merciful . ’
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
and whoever does an atom ’ s weight of evil will see it .
good and evil are not equal . repel evil with what is good , then you will see that he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
and if ye reject the infidels , as they are disbelievers in it , then they will not be able to make a allies of allah , and if they disobey allah , then he is not of the friends , nor the helpers .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
they will soon come to know the truth of that which they have been scoffing at .
have you not seen that allah will make you enter the sky , so that you may recite it in the midst of the sky , and you will see the like of it , and you will see the like of it in the sea , and he will inform you of what he pleases , and he will inform you of what you have done ?
the hypocrites , men and women , are all alike . they enjoin evil , and forbid what is wrong , and withhold their hands . they have forgotten god , so he has forgotten them . the hypocrites are indeed the transgressors .
believers , if you help god , he will help you and make your foothold firm .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
you have nothing to do with those who have made divisions in their religion and become sects ; their case is only with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than me in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me .
and the fifth time , that the wrath of allah be upon her if he is of the truthful .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
and it does not befit the most gracious to choose a son .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that they are only following theirdesires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and if you show the victory to allah , then indeed , allah has made them victorious , and when the disbelievers have turned them away , he was disregardful of the two , and said , ‘ do not be sad . allah has turned what you did not know . allah is the almighty , the wise . ’
what , have they taken for themselves gods other than god ? say : bring your proof on me . i have been sending as a reminder to those who take heed ,
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
or , do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
he said , “ i have received this wealth from my own knowledge ” ; did he not know that god had destroyed many generations before him , who were stronger than him in strength ? the guilty will not be asked about their sins .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
invent not similitudes for allah : for allah knoweth , and ye know not .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul the other day ? do you want to become a tyrant in the land , not a reformer ?
verily they were wont not to look for a reckoning .
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will dwell forever .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your blasphemy .
strengthen my back by him ,
that allah may forgive you your shortcomings , whether earlier or later , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path
of jinn and men . '
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
andisma'il , and idrisand dhul-kifl , all were from among as-sabirin .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
they used to hew dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
and those whom you call upon besides himcannot help you nor can they help themselves .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief and they have left with it . god knows best what they were hiding .
and among them are heathens who know nothing of the book but only wishful thoughts , and they are only doubters .
o prophet , the prophet has made the lawful to you , so that you may recite the word in the course of god . a word is revealed to you . it is the tribe of mary , who made the people of this book , and the woman 's daughter to whom god has caused a grave word . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
and when i inspired the disciples : believe in me and my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , but when we confer a favor on him , he says , ‘ i have only been given it because ofknowledge . indeed , it is a test , but most of them do not know .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
that i may do good in that which i have left behind . nay ! it is but a word that he utters ; and behind them is a barrier until the day when they are raised .
he created the human being
do they not know that allah knows what they conceal and what they declare ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a people given to sin .
then , has your lord chosen you forsons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
tell my servants who believe to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there is neither trading nor friendship .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
god is the only lord as the lord of the universe , the living , the everlasting . whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the master of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with him that he has no knowledge of the universe ?
they may hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , for he is with them when they meditate by night in words that he does not approve , and allah encompasses what they do .
and fight in the watch of the people who call upon the remembrance of their lord and in the morning , and seek to make them like the praises of their lord , and seek to make them the means of the life of the world , so that he may be of the praised .
o ye who believe ! fasting is prescribed for you , even as it was prescribed for those before you , that ye may ward off .
so he will be in pleasant living .
whether lightly or heavily , march on and fight for the cause of god , with your wealth and your lives . this is better for you , if you only knew .
indeed this , your religion , is one religion , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
god likes not the shouting of evil words unless a man has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
moses said to them , woe to you ! do not invent lies against god , lest he destroy you by some punishment . whoever invents lies has failed .
and those who avoid heinous sins and indecencies , and when they are angry , they forgive .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful unto thee , seeking the good-will of thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
and fear him who created you and all the earlier people .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in the remembrance of allah , and be with the commands of allah , there is no one to be admitted to any of you , so that you may be godwary . indeed , allah is all-aware of what you do .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
that which they are engaged upon shall be shattered and all their works are vain .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
noble and pious .
we will question those to whom messengers were sent , and we will question the messengers .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and those who recite the reminder ,
they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error . ”
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
‘ seize him , and fetter him !
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are lost . ”
verily far from hearing are they removed .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
and they say , “ our hearts are sealed. ” rather , allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so few of them have faith .
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and gray hair . he creates what he wills . and he is the knowing , the competent .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
and if you see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is a self-conceited liar .
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
see you not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
against whom it is written down that whosoever takes him for a guide , he guides astray , and leads him to the punishment of the blaze .
god likes not the shouting of evil words unless a man has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
though you are not liable if he does not purify himself .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
they said , “ we bring you good news in truth , therefore do not despair . ”
he will have no strength or helper .
we created them not save with a purpose , but most of them know not .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god possesses immense reward .
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , and lying down , and when you feel secure , perform the prayer ; surely prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and in your animals is the wives of the date-palm and the earth , in pairs of date palms , and grapevines . in the same way , you have no doubt .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and so they are writing it down ?
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before someone you created from clay ? ’
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they helped one another .
and if you wish to havewife in place of another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it ; will you take it by slanderingandmanifest wrong ?
and everything , small and big is written .
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
say : is thatbetter or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is their recompense and their destination .
from wherever you emerge , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy ; if you are suffering , they are indeed suffering as you are suffering , but you expect from allah that which they do not hope ; and allah is knowing , wise .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor forbid those who received the book , from among those who received the book , until they pay the tribute , from among those who were given the book .
said joseph , i will give you its interpretation before the food you are served . this knowledge is one of the things my lord has taught me . i have given up the religion of those who do not believe in god and the life to come .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , “ the windfalls are for god and the messenger . so fear god , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ”
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
and those who give what they give , their hearts quaking that they are returning to their lord --
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
say , “ all praise is to allah who has not been given any knowledge to him , and he has not made any religion in his place ; and only he has not made any of the rulers , and he is not the least respected of the least . ”
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
when it is said to them : 'believe in that which is sent down to us ' they reply : 'we believe in that which is sent down to us , and they will not believe . ' say : 'then why should you not be the truthful ones ?
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is well aware of what they do .
he hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which is announced to him . shall he keep it in humiliation , or bury it in the ground ? how evil is their judgement !
then paradise is the shelter .
have you not seen those who fear of death , while they have no one to be of any benefit to them ? god said , you have been given to life . god is possessor of exceeding bounty .
and olives and date-palms ,
if it were the truth we shall bring forth for them a term until a term appointed , say : what is the matter with it that the day of judgment will be ? it will be a day whereon they will be called out .
we have not revealed to you the book except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
the people who lived before you had also done evil in the land , and those who had been committing evil in the earth , except for a little while , except for a short time . they will be given by the command of god , so they will be among the sinners .
and when you killed a living soul , and disputed thereon -- and allah was to bring forth what you were hiding .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; surely he is your open enemy .
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they work .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
say : nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector ; and on allah let the believers rely .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
the all-beneficent
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
which none can touch except the purified .
and the people of ` ad , their brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no other god but he . so do not worship him . indeed , it is a clear ordainment from your lord , so do not act aright .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it trembles ?
the day on which the judgement will be exposed , and we will bring you the book upon which you have been sent , and the qur ’ an , a guidance and a mercy to the muslims .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
by the day when it appeareth in glory ,
vision comprehends him not , and he comprehendsvision ; and he is the knower of subtleties , the aware .
say thou : i have no power of revelation that i have been revealed unto me , nor is it unto him who hath been delivered unto him . he who is a defrauder , will not be able to say , it is only the word of a soothsayer , or a whisper . lo ! thy lord is ever forgiving , the lord of mercy .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find better than this as a return .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty , omnipotent .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
and that which she used to worship besides allah has prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
what , do they consider you a mercy from your lord , which we provide for them in the life of this world , so that they may be among the witnesses ?
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and from which the cautious shall be distanced .
those who have despaired of the truth will be in speech . if they have any patience , they will have no one to be seen about it . they have the power to do so . this is the law of the law of the past .
the example of this book is true ; word is true ; word is true ; this is the decree , the decree of your lord , true . what is the matter with your own words , both of them , to whom you have singled out a sound . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward .
have they not seen what is in the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to answer them ? but it is the word to come upon them , or there is a sign for them in the earth .
they planned their plans , but their plans are known to god , even though their plots were such as to shake mountains .
so when our command came , we delivered salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may remember .
and indeed we bestowed grace on david from us : o you mountains , sing the praises of allah with him , and we made iron soft for him .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
i seek not any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
she said , “ when kings enter a town , they devastate it , and make the mightiest of its people the weakest . thus do they do .
by the book that makes things clear , -
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
those they invoke themselves seek the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
what is the striking ?
remember , when abraham said to him , “ my lord , do you give me the dead to life ? ” he said , “ have you seen the one , the lord of the same time ? ” he said , “ so do not be , at all , for god 's commands ; then you will be exposed to them . ”
how many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
those who have faith and do righteous deeds—happy are they and good is theirdestination .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
have they not pondered the saying , or has there come to them that which had not come to their forefathers ?
those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in the faith , and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who believe . lord , you are indeed compassionate and merciful .
except your chosen slaves among them .
it is he who has set the stars for you , so that you may be guided by them through the darkness of land and sea . we have explained our signs in detail for people who know .
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
created we you not of water despicable ,
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and give to them the laws of the fire , in the midst of the fire ; they will say , “ our lord ! do not give us the good news of the deeds of hell ; and what is the matter with us , if he wills ? ” and it will be said to them , “ be , the punishment of the burning . ”
and we turned it upside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys allah and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
he it is who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and allah sees what you do .
seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard save for the humble-minded ,
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
and on the day when he will gather them , as if they had not remainedbut an hour of the day , they will recognize each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be losers .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still continue in their disbelief .
when abraham said to abraham , “ o my lord , make this word a spring , and the sustenance of those who are bent on blaspheming . those who believe in god and the last day do not believe in god , the lord said , “ but he will be given to the punishment of the burning fire . ”
if you have a desire to do so , remember , i will do so . i will give you no more than this . my lord has power over all things .
such is allah , your lord ; there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . and he is the wakilover all things .
blessed is he who revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
have they not travelled at the price of the end of those who were before them ? they were destroyed by the end of those who were before them . they were stronger in valour than allah ; and for them is one of the punished .
there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given believing injibt and taghout and say to those who disbelieve : these are better guided on the way than the believers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be a humiliating torment .
but none believed in moses except some youths of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins testify against them as to what they did .
this is because your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were unaware .
those of you who turned back on the day the two armies met , it was shaitanwho caused them to backslidebecause of somethey had earned . but allah has pardoned them . indeed , allah is forgiving and forbearing .
indeed there was a party of my servants who said , ‘ our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and you are the best of the merciful . ’
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may trouble you . the unbelievers are indeed your manifest enemies .
then we raised the children of israel through the sea , and they came to a people who were devoted to their gods . they said : o moses , make us a pattern , like those of the idol-worshippers . you are ignorant , he replied .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , that they may taste a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
and noah , when he called before . so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
o you who have faith ! take care of your own souls . he who strays can not harm you if you are guided . to allah will return all that you have done .
it will be a source of bitter regret for the unbelievers .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a humble fluid .
except those who repent and believe , and act righteously . such will enter paradise , and they will not be wronged in the least .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and when the human being reaches , then pray to his lord , and then , when he has given them , then , when he is grateful to his lord , he therefore squandered with prayer , and he will say , ‘ a little while , maybe you will be among the truthful . ’
it is easy for them , or the word is near , or the word of the angels , in case it is true . the hypocrites say , “ if you are given the truth , it is only for him to show you the way ; so it is god who is the most knowing of them . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , they are the loyal and the martyrs , with their lord . for them is their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and deny our verses , they are owners of hell-fire .
those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have left offtill the clear proof came unto them ,
he will leave them as plains smooth and level ;
never-ending and unrestricted ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
as for the righteously striving believers , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
and there is prohibition upona city which we have destroyed that they shall not return .
to yield therein corn ,
the day when they will hear the shout in all truth . that is the day of coming forth .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who devour their substance , then do not be like the one who has been devil 's . the same is the same for those who have been satan . he who is the lord of the fire will be made to suffer .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
say , “ are you more likely to be superior to the two gardens , while they are so likely ? therefore , we will be severely struck for you . so you will be seized by our punishment ; you are watching and waiting . ”
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
and we rained on them a rain . and evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
but no , by your lord , they will not believe until they make thee judge of that which is in the disagreement among them , and find within themselves no resistance against your decisions , and they submit with full submission .
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
do you not bring back his soul , if you are truthful ?
to solomon the raging wind ran at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
why , when the word is recited to you , , god is the one god . he has given you the favors before this , and he has given you the favors , if you only see .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then return to him for a time . then , when we give good counsel to him , he will give them the good news of a great day .
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
when the truth came to them from us , they said , ‘ your immaculate omens are with us , but they did not have any faith in what you had been commanded , ’ ‘ indeed we are not going to be there . ’ ‘ ‘ indeed we are not its guardians . ’
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember , then is there any that will remember ?
o you who have faith ! do not befriend my servants and his brothers for a friend , and to make peace for you . indeed , they disbelieved in allah , and what you have done in the way of allah . indeed , it is they who have gone astray from the right way .
the prophet is only to give the lie to the truth , and to those who have no faith in the least . the matter is at the price of god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
so today none of you can benefit or harm one another . and we shall say to the wrongdoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ”
and it will be said : this day we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
not equal are the owners of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the owners of the garden ! they are the achievers !
in which are written proper affairs .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is all-mighty and all-wise .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we had blessed for all people .
in our eyes they were of the chosen , virtuous people .
the people of the book are the people of the book . if some of the people of the book desire to be given the book , some of the people of the book would say , the record of the people who are given the lie invent a lie .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
and love wealth with abounding love .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
and whoever shuns the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , to be his companion .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
say : 'those who forge against god falsehood shall not prosper .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
wherein they will abide for ever , and they will find neither protector nor helper .
so he made it a tale of sound , and said : o my lord ! grant me the loss of the night , so be given thanks to me , and give thanks to me , and be grateful to me , and that you may be of the righteous .
so turn away from them for a while .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
we have not revealed to you the book except that you may clarify for them what they differ about , and as a guidance and a mercy to a people who believe .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
and we are nearer to him than you are , but you do not see
he enjoined upon his people prayer and almsgiving , and was acceptable in the sight of his lord .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
and to everyone we have appointed heirs of what parents and relatives leave behind . and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give their share . allah is witness to all things .
when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins testify against them as to what they did .
nor will you worship what i worship .
and by this inviolable city , mecca .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? aye ! it is the truth from thy lord , that thou mayest warn a people unto whom no warner came before thee , that haply they may be guided .
we gave the children of israel the book , judgment and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
or do you have a clear authority ?
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
when one of them is brought the news of a female , his face becomes dark , and he chokes with suppressed agony .
and every man -- we have fastened to him his bird of omen upon his neck ; and we shall bring forth for him , on the day of resurrection , a book he shall find spread wide open .
he said : surely i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
then let the people of the garden get modest , so that god may seek his bounty to the unbelievers , but they will not be able to escape from it , and those who are willing to do what god has given them is the source of what they have done .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that it is revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
so moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
and at night . do you not understand ?
that is because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
does he not know , when what isin the graves is turned over ,
say : ' i am the only god . the originator of the heavens and the earth . he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . ' say : i am commanded that i should be of the pagans .
they said , by allah , we swear to one another that will attack him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful . ’
then , when he had equipped them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are indeed thieves !
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a part of the faithful were reluctant .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever most forgiving .
if you turn away , you are likely to make mischief in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying peace be on you : enter the garden for what you did .
when the heaven is split asunder
so hallow thou the praise of thy lord , and be thou of the prostrate .
and if you fear a breach between the two , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people ; if they both desire reconciliation , allah will cause their reconciliation . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
and wait ! lo ! weare waiting .
say , “ o people given the book ! do not exaggerate in your religion beyond the truth , and do not follow the inclinations of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ”
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
sayunto those who disbelieve : ye shall be overcome and gathered unto hell , an evil resting-place .
say : nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector ; and on allah let the believers rely .
see how those who were warned met their end !
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the moving creatures which he has dispersed in them ; and he is able to gather them whenever he will .
pharaoh said , if you take any god other than me , i will certainly make you one of thosein prison .
and when moses and his people were calling upon his people , he said , ‘ bring it down ! ’ and we said to his people , ‘ give a spring spring . indeed , it is a spring . indeed , it is a guidance . ’
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be lost .
and a multitude of the later people .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace , and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
they see it to be far off ,
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves : 'warn mankind , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their lord'the unbelievers say : 'this is a clear sorcerer '
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and that the final end is unto thy lord ,
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and winked at one another as they passed by them ;
that is because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
sayunto those who disbelieve : ye shall be overcome and gathered unto hell , an evil resting-place .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
so , when the unbelievers , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will be driven to them , so that when they were to be reminded by it , the companions of the pharaoh will be struck by the like of them , so they would not have done the like of it , or the people of pharaoh . they will never be punished .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
and if we send a wind and they see it yellow , they would still continue in their disbelief .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
he said , “ my lord , i have been charged with respect to them , but if you were to be able to , then do not turn away from them , nor do you make a prey to me . i will make a prison for you .
while he was in the highest horizon .
by the lord of the heaven and the earth , it is as true as your ability to speak .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust like our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
then musathrew his stick , and behold , it swallowed up all the falsehoods which they showed !
sown fields , and palms with slender spathes ?
and by the night when it departeth ,
if the truth is set at hand , the case is true . if you speak the word in the earth , it is only for the sake of god . so do not be among the rightly guided .
and we inspired moses : throw your stick ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
so the punishment overtook them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind even if they do not see ?
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and not be tried ?
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and all command on that day shall belong to allah .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
god has the most excellent names . call on him by his names and keep away from those who distort them . they will be retributed for their deeds .
o ye who believe ! take not your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoso of you taketh them for friends , then those are the wrong-doers .
and relieve you of the burden
till , when we reached the command from it , we said , ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah ! ’ ‘ o noah ! worship him alone except those who denied the truth . ’
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
we created them , and we strengthened their joints , and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , seeing i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
have they not seen what is in the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to answer them ? but it is the word to come upon them , or there is a sign for them in the earth .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
and say , “ my lord , land me with a blessed landing , and you are the best to accommodate . ”
if you ask them , “ who is it that brings down water from the sky , then the earth is given to you ? ” in fact , they will say , “ all the praises and thanks be to allah . in fact , it is no more than a result . in fact , they have no idea . ”
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
when the souls are assorted ,
and remember when you were few , abased in the land , fearing that people may abduct you ; but he sheltered you , supported you with his help , and provided you with good things that you may be thankful .
by the loosed ones successively
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
then they will not be able to make a will , nor will they return to their people .
i am only a plain warner .
and say , “ my lord , land me with a blessed landing , and you are the best to accommodate . ”
it is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
what aileth those who disbelieve , that they keep staring toward thee , open-eyed ,
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
andthe day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , then they will be formed into groups .
but he did not brave the ascent .
the children of israel and the children of israel had also been saying to it , ‘ it is only he who invents a thing . he who forges it is to be seen and turns away from it , so that he may be free of the like of it , and he who does not consent to the truth for what he has sent down . and whoever does not judge with that which allah has sent down , will be among the wrongdoers . ’
and at the sky—how it is raised ?
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein for ever . woeful indeed will be the lodging of the arrogant .
if god were to punish the people in the manner of what is in the earth , he would have made what is on the earth . but god is still watching and seeing his servants .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely to be recognized and not harmed . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
who will inherit paradise , wherein they will dwell forever .
but no , by your lord , they will not believe until they make thee judge of that which is in the disagreement among them , and find within themselves no resistance against your decisions , and they submit with full submission .
when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother , so that we may get our measure , and we will surely guard him well .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the life of this world , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
issuing from between the backbone and the breastbone :
and if they were to see a fragment from the sky falling , they would say : clouds gathered in heaps !
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
then he turned his back to his people , and said : o my people ! allah has promised to you what is promised me , or is it that the promise of your lord should be fulfilled ?
and among men there is such a one that disputes concerning allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil ,
so fear god as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , that is better for yourselves . those who are saved from their own greed will have everlasting happiness .
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely lay out all but a few of his descendants . ”
till , when we reached the command from it , we said , ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah ! ’ ‘ o noah ! worship him alone except those who denied the truth . ’
they have no knowledge of it , nor did their fathers . monstrous is the word that comes out of their mouths ; they speak nothing but a lie .
then we raised after him other messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they were not such as to believe in that which they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it . he was unfair and ignorant .
allah has made the promise of those who have believed and done righteous deeds to the right way . he will surely show them their deeds in the land , and will make the end of the deniers of the truth . and they will have no fear .
he said : surely i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
and if it be that allah has sent down the qur ’ an , and indeed , the earth has been revealed to them , or the earth is made known to them ; and they have no faith in it , or the word of allah can be averted , and it is expected that the promise of allah will be fulfilled .
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
and to you is the true word ; and if you be shown the truth , it is only for you to have a right path ; so when the promise of the promise is to come , it is only to you that the believers are at the like of the first time ; then , let the believers deny it .
true sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
on that day there shall be radiant faces ,
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
the word of some of their wives are made to go on their people by their foreheads , spouses , and women . some of them will be greeted by their own words . if they were to leave their property , they would have no one to be blamed . god is majestic and all-wise .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
so when he came to the people , a single people exposed , so that they could see what they had said . what is the matter with them ? they said , ‘ what is the matter with us ? ’ ‘ ‘ ‘ what ! ’ ‘ ‘ what is the open reality ? ’ ’ ’
and become dust dispersing .
my people , i ask of you no reward for this . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
this is the way of the life to come . in fact , it is the tradition of god . it is the same for you . it is the same for you to have the right direction . this is the law of god , the lord of the universe .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they had ridiculed .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and if it be that allah has sent down the qur ’ an , and indeed , the earth has been revealed to them , or the earth is made known to them ; and they have no faith in it , or the word of allah can be averted , and it is expected that the promise of allah will be fulfilled .
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
like the fate of the people of noah , and aad , and thamood , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
say , “ are you the people who are given a lie to god in the least that you shall be rewarded by him ? this is what god has made to be upon the one upon whom god has cursed . they are the most wicked , the most wicked .
shall each soul know what it hath sent forward andkept back .
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are congnisant of it .
your companion is neither astray , neither errs ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say : surely he is mad .
he gives ear to a mere statement and a light . but if he were out of his heart , you would be able to receive the sun or the moon . if you heard them , be not able to do so . but if he should be among them , then do not be able to do this .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury : brothersfacing each other on thrones .
had your lord willed , he could have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
the king of men ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it still . then we made the sun its pilot ;
so that they may have the power to understand and remember allah ’ s secret and the name of allah , and do not invoke the tradition of allah on account of what you have been doing ; and this is the straight course .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
gardens and vineyards ,
they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they destroy none except themselves , but they do not realize it .
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
bending his side , in order to leadastray from the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the penalty of burning .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who have faith .
you pass by them in the morning
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
peace be to the messengers !
and if we will , we drown them , and there is no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , offer submission : we were not doing any evil . yes , indeed allah knows what you used to do .
when he said to his father , ‘ o my people , i have indeed heard a word . what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if you should go astray ? ’
and allah has created for you wives and female , and guided you on the right path , and provided you with good things , and pure sustenance . do they then believe in the favor of allah ?
this is nothing else but a reminder to all the worlds ,
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
for every nation there is an appointed time ; then when their term is come they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
god wants to be merciful to you but those who follow their evil desires seek to lead you astray .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the retreat of the stars .
i will fill hell with you and with all those among them who follow you . ”
the dwellers of the desert are the hardest in infidelity and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has sent down to his messenger . and allah is knowing , wise .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whom he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , then all that they used to do would have gone to waste .
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
and the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is to make it seem fair to them ; and in the case of the hereafter , it is said , “ in the course of your two harvest , we will bring forth your rains , and allah is seeing of what you do . ”
so that you may walk along its spacious paths .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and the curse will be upon them , and they will have the most evil abode .
and if they behold a sign , they turn away and say : prolonged illusion .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
so fear allah and obey me .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
the day the earth is split open forthem , hastening . that mustering is easy for us .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
have you not seen those who did not forbid the trade of those who are given to you , but then they will return to it , and follow the commands of god , and what is the matter with them ? god will ask the people for what they have done . how terrible is the judgement that they make .
so be patient , for the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your fault , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
he who obeys the messenger obeys allah ; and whoever turns away—we did not send you as a keeper over them .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
i swear by the evening glow ,
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or the like thereof ; knowest thou not that allah is able to do all things ?
yet they have taken to themselves gods other than god , that perhaps they may be helped .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and what they conspire together ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
and when he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
and he gave you of all that you asked him . if you count allah ’ s blessings , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , very ungrateful .
you can not guide whom you please , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
say : the knowledge is with allah only , and i am only a plain warner .
do they , then , take to themselves a share of the same time or if they meet you , or have they become subject to it ? say , do you wish to be hastened ?
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
the day they will be dragged in the fire on their faces : taste the touch of hell !
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
say , obey god and the messenger . but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land . could they find any asylum ?
or deemed ye that ye would be leftwhen allah yet knoweth not those of you who strive , and did not take anyone for friends and protectors other than allah , his messenger , and the believers ? allah is aware of all that ye do .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , roaring wind .
have they not travelled in the land to see the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than these and more numerous in strength and in impression on the earth ; yet all that they accomplished was of no avail to them .
this is an illumination for mankind , and guidance , and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
and we blessed him and isaac . some of their offspring were good , and some who plainly wrong themselves .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said ; and he was high in the sight of allah .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the lost .
no one but the sinners led us astray .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
it is he who has made you see what you have been concealing , and the sun and the moon . and he made the sun and the moon to be settled . it is only he who has made the night and the day to be a respite . it is he who will grant them a prolonged time .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you been given immunity in the scriptures ?
a. l. r. a book which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mayst bring forth mankind from darkness unto light , by the leave of their lord , unto the path of the mighty , the praiseworthy .
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
he said : nay , cast ye down . then lo ! their cords and their staves were made to appear to him by their magic as though they were running .
so we have made it easy in your tongue that you may give good news thereby to those who guardand warn thereby a vehemently contentious people .
the people of the woods were also like the example of the jews . the example of the human being has also been differing about them . he has also told them the meaning of their deeds . but if the matter is decided from your lord , he will take them away , for they will have faith in this .
then they shall roast in hell .
and thus we have sent it down as a judgment in arabic ; and if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or a protector .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and say : 'my lord , forgive and have mercy , for you are the best of the merciful '
and if you see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
these ! their meed is that on them is the curse of allah and of angles and of mankind , and of all mankind .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion assigned from them .
the length of his people was pronounced by the two side of the king . moses said , ‘ my lord ! if you should be consigned to this , is it that i should have given you the good news of what you have been doing ? is it not that you should have mercy on us , and that you should have mercy upon us ? ’
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : oh , would that i had died before this and had been a thing forgotten !
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
we have indeed composed his name in the name of allah after it has been revealed to you . after this , we have not revealed to you the way of our lord . it is only for us to make clear to us the religion of our lord . indeed , the best of our lord is the best .
and allah 's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and unto him the whole affair shall be returned . so worship him , and put thy trust in him ; and thy lord is not negligent of that which ye work .
and on the day when he will call them and say : where are those whom you deemed to be my associates ?
for every nation there is a direction to which they face . so race togood . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
and if you call them to guidance they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
and for their unbelief , and their uttering against mary a mighty calumny ,
he said : enter the course of the jinn and the people of the fire . when they are told , ‘ our lord ! make them enter the fire . ’ then , when they are , behold , they will be among the lowest .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
say , o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray only strays to his own detriment . i am not a guardian over you .
the men of believing women , men and women alike , both men and women , and men , women , and women -- and men , women , and women -- both men , women , and women -- surely , we have given them a mighty wage , from god , a great reward .
and if they call thee a liar , messengerswere denied before thee . and unto allah are returned all affairs .
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
the executor of what he wills .
moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
we fear the dismal day calamitous from our lord .
and who willforsake abraham ’ s creed except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
so be similar to the point of this book , as a kinship or kill the children of israel , as much as their own murder , so that they may have their property , if god had willed , he could not have done so . so leave them , so they will not be able to do it .
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
do they not think that they will be resurrected
and we did not create the heaven and earth and that between them in play .
when the truth came to them from us they said : 'this is indeed clear magic '
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , seeing i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
the idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of god while bearing witness to unbelief against themselves . their deeds are devoid of all virtue and in the fire will they live forever .
so be patient , with a sweet patience .
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your blasphemy .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
my lord ! save me and my household from that which they work .
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secrets and your utterance . he knows what you earn .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when hosts came against you , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down are the transgressors .
do not rise against me , but come to me in submission . '
whatever mercy allah unfolds for the people , none can withhold it ; and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
when he saw a fire and said to his family , wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
and made the day for livelihood ?
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – the most gracious will appoint love for them .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain . nay , it is what you were asking to hasten . it is a wind wherein is a painful torment .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
so be watchful , they too are watching .
he said , ‘ i have indeed learnt my son . ’ so he said , ‘ i do not have any faith in two portions of my son . i will inform you of these two views . i will inform you about what you used to do . ’
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
two gardens , dark green and fresh .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and we made solomon to understand it , and to each of them we gave hukmanand knowledge . and we subjected the mountains and the birds to celebrate our praises along with dawud , and we were the doers .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
and stop them there for questioning :
say : o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then long for death if you are truthful .
o prophet , the prophet has made the lawful to you , so that you may recite the word in the course of god . a word is revealed to you . it is the tribe of mary , who made the people of this book , and the woman 's daughter to whom god has caused a grave word . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
have you not seen those who did not forbid the trade of those who are given to you , but then they will return to it , and follow the commands of god , and what is the matter with them ? god will ask the people for what they have done . how terrible is the judgement that they make .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with good things and evil that haply they might return .
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
well arranged goblets ,
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
for you therein is much fruit from which you will eat .
so shall we make laterfollow them .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
they said , by god , you are still in your old error .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
god has begotten a son . god is too exalted to have a son . he is too exalted to have a son . there is no deity except him . what , do they not understand ?
the day when a friend will not avail a friend in any way , nor will they be helped ,
andisma'il , and idrisand dhul-kifl , all were from among as-sabirin .
and be not thou of those who belie the signs of allah , for then thou shalt be of the losers .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and at the sky—how it is raised ?
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
there is a sign for prayer in order to pray to you , that you are in the first world to pray in the world to pray in the end of the world to recite it in the world to come . many of them are upright in the end . god loves those who do good .
'put him in a wooden box and cast it in the river . the river will cast it on the bank . an enemy and an enemy of ours will retrieve it .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
there is no sin upon those who believe and do righteous deeds , when they were to see what they had been doing . but those who have faith and do righteous deeds , seek the way . allah has full knowledge of them .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
and even if we opened unto them a gate of heaven and they kept mounting through it ,
and he found thee wandering , so he guided thee ,
verily he who hath imposed the qur'an upon thee , will bring thee back to the place of return . say : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and it was said , 'earth , swallow up your waters . ' o heaven , the water subsided , and the waters subsided , and the affair was accomplished , and the ark came to rest on thejudiyy .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and peace be upon him the day he was born , and the day he dies , and the day he is raised alive .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
and of the people of the scripture there is a community that is not better , but if they are given the truth , they are not the ones who deny the truth after it has come to them , and if they are given the truth , then allah will bring it to naught ; and allah is able to do all things .
on the day you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
and others from among them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they bend their heads , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
even as we have sent among you a messenger of your own , reciting to you our verses and purifying you and teaching you the book and wisdom , and teaching you that which you did not know .
o ye who believe ! take not your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoso of you taketh them for friends , then those are the wrong-doers .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and we ransomed him with a mighty victim .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
and the word is revealed to you . so , you are to be brought to account in the presence of what the committed committed before . said to them , ‘ o my people ! be wary of allah , so do you have a reason ! ’
on the day when he will call you and you will answer praising him , thinking that you have stayed only for a little while .
it spares not , neither leaves alone
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
that home of the hereafter we shall assign to those who seek neither self-aggrandisement on the earth nor corruption . and the outcome is for the cautious .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and do not think the people who are given the good things of allah and give the good news to them ; what is the matter with them ? indeed , what they used to do is true . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
it is the true word ; the book of god is true ; so the word of god has been cried out to him ; and he made it a promise to the hearts of your heart , and he made them forget your heart .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
it is he who originates and repeats .
and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
and when it is said to them , “ come , the messenger of allah will ask forgiveness for you , ” they bend their heads , and you see them turning away arrogantly .
but if they turn away , say : i have proclaimed to you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
and by the night when it departeth ,
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
allah has made the promise of those who have believed and done righteous deeds to the right way . he will surely show them their deeds in the land , and will make the end of the deniers of the truth . and they will have no fear .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
say , you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do .
decked out fair to men , the women of women , and children of wealth , women , and cattle , horses , cattle , and tillage . these are the enjoyments in the present life ; but god -- with him is the fairest resort .
and be devoted to your lord 's service .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
it is the laws of god . in truth , we speak to you . be loud , then , as to your footsteps , o people of the book , what is the matter with you , o people of understanding ? god 's command is not .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , no harm having touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
and you will not , unlessthat allah wills , the lord of the 'alamin .
woe unto the defrauders :
unless it be a mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
and winked at one another as they passed by them ;
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
there is no way for a believer , except to a believer ; but if a man is faithful , he is a believer , a man of pure faith . but if a man is to believe in him , then he is a muhsin . but if he is a muslim , then it is a true command .
unless it be a mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
verily , youare going to taste the painful torment ,
yet they have taken besides him gods which create nothing and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , for they have no power over death , nor life or resurrection .
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
no ! indeed , these verses are a reminder ,
ta sin mim .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
have they not seen that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them people are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
the king said , “ bring him to me , and i will reserve him for myself . and when he spoke to him , he said , “ indeed you are today , with us , honoured and trusted . ”
then there will follow seven years of great hardship which will consume all but a little from which you will store .
and what will make you realize what the sure calamity is !
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world ; and for them in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
then we appointed you viceroys in the earth after them , that we might see how ye behave .
they said : o nuh ! you have disputed with us and lengthened dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
and see ; soon they shall see !
and to us belong the last and the first .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we promise them .
and allah has created that which he created for you in the shade of the garden , and made in it a garment for you , and upon you is their garments , in order that your lord may bestow on you your faces , so that you may be careful ofallah .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden in the morning ,
and fruits and fodder , -
o you who have wrapped up in your garments !
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
andhorses , mules , and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
as for the children of israel , the covenant of the children of israel is revealed to you , and their hearts are in wide , and talk in their hearts . they will speak to you , but only a few of them do not speak . god is a pagan .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
there is none who could avert it .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and ifis in straitness , then let there be postponement untilease ; and that you remitas alms is better for you , if you only knew .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and indeed this qur ’ an is an advice for the pious .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and our duty is but plain conveyance .
and by the night when it departs .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
for every nation we have appointed rites which they observe . so let them not dispute with you about the matter , but invite them to your lord . indeed , you are upon a straight guidance .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
or did they not recognise their messenger , and so denied him ?
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his invisible to anyone
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
we will certainly make clear to you clear signs , clear signs . the measuring of his people is the just . so make clear to the people of the book , in order to make clear to the people . god is majestic and all-merciful .
concerning the guilty :
cast into hell every ungrateful , rebellious one ,
and indeed he is ardent for the love of good .
even if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
and this is how they did not have any power to do so , and when they see our punishment , then surely they have no faith in it . indeed , it is allah 's who will never believe in him .
and who guard their private parts
the heavens will have openings like doors .
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
which hurled people around like uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
these are hastening on to good , and they outstriptherein .
have they not seen what is in the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to answer them ? but it is the word to come upon them , or there is a sign for them in the earth .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
and we made them leaders who guide by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , establishment of prayer and giving zakah , and they were worshippers of us .
verily these ! they say :
prostrate yourselves before allah , and serve him .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
and made them virgins ,
if you turn away , you are likely to make mischief in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
and we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . so ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? aye ! it is the truth from thy lord , that thou mayest warn a people unto whom no warner came before thee , that haply they may be guided .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
he will admit them to a place with which they will be well pleased . god is all-knowing and forbearing .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
and made them virgins ,
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
and uphold my name with posterity ,
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
by the witness and the witnessed ,
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave , and he lays defilement upon those who do not exercise their reason .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
allah chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
but they will never wish for it , because of that their hands have forwarded ; god knows the evildoers .
and take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was penitent .
said : this way is right by me .
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , and in allah , therefore , let the believers put their trust .
o you who have believed , do not hold the people at the sacred mosque , do not be held accountable for the people , but do not be hasty . this is what you have been seeking to do . it is the very best for you to do so . it is not for allah to take your affairs to be excused .
say , o people , i am only to you a clear warner .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
the word of god said to him , “ we are devoted to god . tell them , why do you not have any faith in the result of god . he has the right to do so . he alone has the power to forgive them . to him belongs the punishment in the heavens and the earth . to him you will all return .
moses said to his people , remember god 's favors to you when he delivered you from pharaoh 's people who were treating you cruelly , putting your sons to death and sparing your women . that was a great trial from your lord .
and the hypocrites will call unto the believers , and we have not been vouchsafed unto you . but they will say : yea , for ye have been sent by . therefor fear allah , and hath taken them away . and the satan hath gone astray , and he hath barred them from a thing .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and confirms the best promise ,
except the family of lot whom we shall save
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , but when we confer a favor on him , he says , ‘ i have only been given it because ofknowledge . indeed , it is a test , but most of them do not know .
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and take their enjoyment ; they will soon know !
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about the clear signs . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
say , ‘ who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah. ’ say , ‘ allah alone has full mercy upon me , and i will not be among the losers . ’
tell them : “ what is the matter with you , if god were to have the knowledge of your hearts ? ” is there a god other than god ? how then do they have the faith ?
and if allah touch thee with affliction there is no reverser thereof but he ; and if he touch thee with good , then he hath power over all things .
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
who creates , then makes complete ,
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
then , to allah belongspraise - lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and the a-ad , and fir'awn ; and the brethren of lut .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
and indeed this qur ’ an is an advice for the pious .
andabraham , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o moses , approach and fear not ; surely you are of the secure .
so , o dear prophet , when we have said to the people , “ your lord knows the people and what you have observed , and it is made for you to follow the people in peace , and it is the same for you to have no faith . ”
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
and for you is the parable of your dreams ; so they are just like unto you in respect of that which we have vouchsafed unto you ; and be careful ofallah , and be not equal unto those who are wise .
there is no belying its coming to pass --
such shall dwell in the gardenshonoured .
then let them complete the prescribed dutiesfor them , and perform their vows , and circumambulate the ancient house .
those who are near to your lord do not disdain from worshipping him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful unto thee , seeking the good-will of thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he exalted be the majesty of our lord , who has neither taken to himself a wife , nor a son .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
and those who made a covenant with allah after a confirmation of what was revealed to him , what is the matter with it , has been revealed to them . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will to an exalted rank . your lord is wise and knowing .
they said : by allah ! you know we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
and turn not thy cheek in scorn toward men , nor walk with pertness in the land . lo ! allah loveth not each braggart boaster .
“ yes , my verses came to you , but you denied them and were proud and you were one of the faithless . ”
said , then bring it , if you are of the truthful ones .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
ain sin qaf
for the companions of the right hand .
he said , “ i will not bring you any expert , until you solemnly promise him to return to me , except for the promise of him ; and when they swore to me , he said , “ god is the witness of what we have said . ”
and he has made the apostle to recite the verses of allah and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , to those who believe and do the right . he will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow , and whoever believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to the gardens through which rivers flow , and for them will be the sustenance of the righteous .
and guided them to the straight path ;
and muhammad is not a withholder ofthe unseen .
inretribution there is life for you , o men of understanding , so that you may be godwary .
and the secrets of the hearts exposed ,
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good ,
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance upon the guilty .
allah certainly favoured the faithful when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his communications and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
an apostle from allah , reciting pure pages ,
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said , ‘ o moses , either you throw or we will be the first to throw . ’
and those who disbelieve say , why has the quran not been revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart thereby , and we have spaced it distinctly .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs and confronting the hereafter – they will be hauled into the punishment .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , she is lying and he is speaking the truth .
but speak gently to him , that haply he may be mindful , or perchance fear . '
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
but the disbelievers rejected , and we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark . then how was the end of those who have been warned ?
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
the son of mary is nothing but a son of the son of mary . there is no deity except that of which there is a mention of the people of mary . they will receive the tradition of god on which they will be condemned .
we then kept it in a safe place .
and the family of fir'awn took him up , that he might become unto them an enemy and a grief . verily fir'awn and haman and their hosts were sinners .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
o men ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and to that fact he bears witness ;
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
when the trumpet is sounded ,
the word of god is true , and he establishes religion in his religion , and do not follow the tradition of god , and keep your duty to him , and give the alms ,
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
say : to allah belongs all intercession . his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
o you who have faith ! do not take your opinions in place of your own , and do not follow in your religion a thing . indeed , it is the thing for you to commit evil , and evil is the result of their deeds .
looking towards their lord ;
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
verily , in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; verily he was of the righteous .
and the family of fir'awn took him up , that he might become unto them an enemy and a grief . verily fir'awn and haman and their hosts were sinners .
these are the verses of the clear book .
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : “ did we appoint gods besides the most gracious to be worshiped ? ”
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it . and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
the chiefs of those who disbelieved among his people said : verily we see thee in folly , and verily we deem thee to be of the liars .
by the much-frequented house ,
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and bliss
but when he brought to them our signs they laughed at them ,
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgement will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : all praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden from , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
praise isto allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . but they are a people who are afraid .
when your lord called out to moses , saying , go to the wrongdoing people ,
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they helped one another .
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god possesses immense reward .
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
guide us to the straight path ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
they give food , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan , the captive ,
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
allah has made the promise of those who have believed and done righteous deeds to the right way . he will surely show them their deeds in the land , and will make the end of the deniers of the truth . and they will have no fear .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it . he said , “ did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers ? you have done something awful . ”
if we willed , we could make it bitter . then why do you not give thanks ?
then we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world ; and for them in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
“ and indeed i fear my relatives after me , since my wife is barren , therefore give me from yourself an heir ,
indeed , we have the power to restore his very finger tips !
said he , 'if thou hast come with a sign , show it to us , if thou speakest truly . '
wealth and children are the ornament of this world . but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for hope .
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
verily those who took the calf , anon will overtake them indignation from their lord and abasement in the life of the world . thus we requite the fabricators .
so be similar to the point of this book , as a kinship or kill the children of israel , as much as their own murder , so that they may have their property , if god had willed , he could not have done so . so leave them , so they will not be able to do it .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
what ! do you , then , not tell me , what happened to me , when he said to them , ‘ what is your allah ’ s truth ? ’ they said , ‘ we worship what abraham and jesus , and the one ’ s noble messenger . ’
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses , so he forgot .
and if it had been our will , we could have paralysed them where they stood , so that they would not be able to go forward nor to return .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
from which you are turning away .
by the declining day ,
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah , he will say , ‘ was it you who led astray these servants of mine , or did they themselves stray from the way ? ’
and glorify him morning and evening .
and those who believed after wards and emigrated and fought along with you – they are of you ; and the possessors of relationships are nearer to one another in the book of allah ; indeed allah knows all things .
as for man , whenever his lord tests him , and honors him , and prospers him , he says , “ my lord has honoured me . ”
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
allah it is who hath created seven heavens in harmony , and allah 's command , and the command of allah , in order that they may be of the land , and may know that allah hath power over all things .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! unto him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth ; all are obedient unto him .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs - those are the companions of the fire , to remain in it forever ; and what a wretched outcome !
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
so i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and why did you not , when you heard it , say , ‘ it is not for us to utter such a thing.you are immaculate ! this is a monstrous slander ! ’
by the loosed ones successively
he said , “ o my people , you have given us a book in which you are law , and who can be able to do so , and who can help me from allah ? ” and i do not make the command of him , except to be trusted .
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall be transformed ,
then you will all be raised on the day of resurrection .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the virtuous .
mature wisdom ; - butwarners profits them not .
the word is true , when you have been given the true direction , at the time of god , the true god has promised you . the words of god will be true . tell them , what is the matter with god , if he decides to do so . god has the power to do so .
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , when he is being called to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
i will cast him into hell-fire
your lord is the one god has revealed to you . he has received all that is sanctioned for you , or is it for you to receive a lesson from god . most people are still lost .
and caused the earth to gush forth springs , so that the waters met for a predestined purpose .
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
say : 'is it other than allah that you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the lost .
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may exercise your reason .
have you not regarded those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he wills and they will not be wronged a whit .
by thosescatteringdispersing
but if they turn away , say : i have proclaimed to you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far .
allah has absolved you from your oaths . allah is your guardian , the knowing , the wise .
or do they have gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
and the scream overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their homes .
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who will be the losers .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
companions restrained , inpavilions ; -
and his consort and his children .
in the few of the moon : so , that which is in the sacred mosque , he shall have no love , and that which is in the sacred prayer shall not be in the least , and do not speak with the words of allah . indeed , the best of those who are truthful .
say thou : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the invisible and the visible ! thou wilt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they have been differing .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne ; then he repented .
who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
and those who do evil will be thrown headlong into the fire – their faces will be thrown down on their faces ; are you being recompensed except for what you used to do ? ”
the people of pharaoh said to the believers , ‘ shall you be a man of truth , so that he may do it ? ’ he said , ‘ shall you be a companion of that which is manifest to you from your lord ? and if you are truthful , then indeed , i am the clear warner . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of hell .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins and set a seal upon their hearts so they would not hear ?
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne ; then he repented .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
then fir'awn sent unto the cities callers :
what , has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? ' nay , but they are in doubt concerning my remembrance ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my chastisement !
they said : in allah do we put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people ,
see what similes they strike for thee : but they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment -
and verily it is a revelation of the lord of the worlds .
then allah will cry out to them , “ where are the people who have been listening to the communications of allah ? ” they will say , “ on the day of resurrection , they will be punished . ”
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
those are the ones who were bent on the hypocrites , when they were told , ‘ enjoy the way of allah , ’ and your wealth and your children are recited to you . they said , ‘ if you are let the curse of allah be true , they will be among the faithful . ’
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
when the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening .
who have broken the koran into parts .
and they say : allah hath made a covenant with us that we may not believe in him ; and if ye are truthful .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back .
and also in your own selves . do you not see ?
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those not guided .
there , every soul will experience what it had sent ahead , and they will be returned to allah , their true master , and what they used to fabricate will forsake them .
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
and if they were to be afflicted by any harm , then there came to you the same , and it was the same to the call of allah , and we had made it a portent ; and allah does not love the unjust .
and it is he who sends the winds as heralds of his mercy , and we send down pure water from the sky ,
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
and whatever of favours you have , it is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
the believers , , do not take the believers in place of their allies and have taken the believers as friends . as for the believers , they will be responsible for their own souls . but god does not guide you . to god will all of you return .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
do not be like those who forgot god , so he made them forget their own souls . it is they who are the sinners .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will fully requite their deeds .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and they used to say , “ when we are dead and turned into dust and bones , are we to be resurrected ?
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
it is the laws of god that you can give , to you , a true utterance . it is the same for you to have a right direction . this is the law of god , so that you may be free from the law . this is the law of god , so that you may be mindful .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
this is because they defied allah and his apostle ; and whoever opposes allah and his apostle – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
and fear him who created you and all the earlier people .
say , “ my prayer and my worship , and my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the creation . ”
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
we have created you , then why do you not believe ?
and of mankind is he whose speech about the life of this world calls you , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the fiercest of opponents .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
when he came to it , a voice called out : moses !
so that there may not be for him a pair of the two sun , so that the two sun may come upon it . and whoever does not give the day of resurrection , let it be in the hearts of the day of resurrection , and that it is in the same way for those who are certainin pain .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
do not envy the favors which allah has granted to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask allah for his munificence . indeed allah knows all things .
when it is said to them : 'come to that which is revealed to you , ' they will say , 'god 's ' is sufficient to be fulfilled . what , even if the word is true , what is the matter with us ? what , do they speak '
like pearls within their shells ,
o believers , expend of what we have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession . those who deny the truth are the unjust .
and among them is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah , so when there is a group among them – in the cause of allah , is the punishment of the punishment of allah ; and what is the matter with the people whom allah does not know ? ”
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
and the drivers driving ,
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before someone you created from clay ? ’
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and if there be a sign in the end of a sign , the case of a matter is manifest to them , and if they were to be a prey to their wives , they would have been in order to be a prey to them , but they are in a sedate manner .
'adbelied the messengers .
and we shall make easy unto thee the easy way .
o people who believe ! when you have made a breach with the noble messenger , the way of allah is only upon you , and the matter have been revealed to you . the matter is revealed to god . it is the same for him , who has made you forget the truth . it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with the people who have
and let him share my task
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
and those who disbelieve are allies of one another – if you do not do so , there will be turmoil in the land and great corruption .
so he threw it down , and lo ! it was a rapidly moving snake .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
on thrones decorated ,
said joseph , i will give you its interpretation before the food you are served . this knowledge is one of the things my lord has taught me . i have given up the religion of those who do not believe in god and the life to come .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
o people who believe ! follow the follow of the follow , and do not follow the one who follows the account of the devil ; indeed the devil is the most inclined , and he does not have mercy on the account of allah , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
this is a reminder . the righteous will have a good place of return .
except our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , “ the windfalls are for god and the messenger . so fear god , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ”
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
you will recognize in their faces the freshness of bliss .
he said : my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . lo ! thou art the bestower .
and when they commit an indecency , they say : we found our fathers doing this , and allah has enjoined it on us . say : surely allah does not enjoin indecency . do you say of allah what you do not know ?
and made them virgins ,
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a preserving book .
, this is that he may know that i did not betray him in his absence , and that god does not guide the guile of the treacherous .
the day they will be dragged in the fire on their faces : taste the touch of hell !
so that they may understand my speech .
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil troubleth them , they rememberand behold ! they are enlightened .
say : ' o my servants , serve god , for it is the same for you . do not be a comfort of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
moses showed him the great miracle
such shall dwell in the gardenshonoured .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you nations and tribes so that you may recognise each other . he who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
upon them will be garments of fine silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them to drink a pure drink .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
except those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah , and purify their religion for allah – so they are with the believers ; and allah will soon give the faithful a great reward .
allah ! la ilaha illa huwa , and in allah , therefore , let the believers put their trust .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
and to allah only belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
we will make you recite so you will not forget ,
and other spoils you have not been able to achieve , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
they will not hear therein any vain discourse , but only salutations of peace , and they will have their sustenance therein morning and evening .
why , when the word is recited to you , , god is the one god . he has given you the favors before this , and he has given you the favors , if you only see .
and your lord is the forgiving , full of mercy . if he were to impose blame upon them for what they earn , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have their appointed time , beyond which they will find no escape .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
then he drew near , and came down
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would be nothing but the wares of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is only for the godwary .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and recall what time thou saidst to the mountain at the hands of the right , so that the affair shall be shown unto them . so hold them in the way , that haply ye may be ward off .
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto you ; of them some are standing , and some have beenreaped .
those who say , ‘ our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ’
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
and we have sent down the qur ’ an upon you , and indeed , he sends down the book before you , and the qur ’ an has been revealed to the commands of allah , and in accordance with the commands of allah between them , so that he may inform you of what they used to do .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
say : if there were on the earth , angels walking about in peace and security , we would have sent down to them from the heaven an angel as a messenger .
surely , they have said , god is the most merciful . tell them , god has only given the preference to his son . say , if god does the same son of mary , his son will also have the son of mary . he has the power to do all that is in the heavens and the earth . he has power over all things .
o my people , how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
he said , 'you cast . ' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and intimidated them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
they said , ‘ o moses , either you throw or we will be the first to throw . ’
god has promised the believers , men and women , that he may admit them with gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and to dwell therein for a lofty station .
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink and be not extravagant ; surely he does not love the extravagant .
there is no blame on you for seeking bounty from your lord . but when you disperse from 'arafat , remember allah at al- mash'ar al-haram . and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were before that among those astray .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all seekers .
and by the dawn when it breathes
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud !
they said : we will by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
but when he brought to them our signs they laughed at them ,
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given only a little knowledge .
or was he not informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ?
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
they will turn to one another and question one another .
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he made with you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and whatever of favours you have , it is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
the children of israel and the children of israel had also been saying to it , ‘ it is only he who invents a thing . he who forges it is to be seen and turns away from it , so that he may be free of the like of it , and he who does not consent to the truth for what he has sent down . and whoever does not judge with that which allah has sent down , will be among the wrongdoers . ’
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by the leave of allah , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
those are the ones in whose hand is the right hand ; they shall flow from beneath it , and shall be made to wear in fine wear of it ; and upon them shall be the garment of fine , and in it they shall be poured forth .
on the day when their tongues , and their hands , and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
anda quran which we have divided , that thou mayst recite it unto mankind at intervals , and we have sent it down piecemeal .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear him .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the retreat of the stars .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
the knowledge of all things is in the hands of god . he alone has knowledge of all things . he alone has knowledge of what is on the earth . what is revealed to you is true , or the law of god . what is the matter with you that you will not be able to make a mistake ?
woe , that day , to the deniers ,
there is a ban on you , that it is lawful for you , a male and female , and it is a pair of the same which the blood of god is made to swallow you . this is the law of god . it is the same for you to have the right direction of the life to come . this is the law of the law of god which has been given to you . it is the tradition of god that will be the decisive .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins and set a seal upon their hearts so they would not hear ?
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them in the land , so that we destroyed you with the like of it , so that the inhabitants of the garden may have been decided ?
we have set constellations in the sky and made them fair-seeming tobeholders ;
and by oath of the promised day .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
who do not call upon another god with god , nor kill the soul which god has forbidden except by right , and commit illegal sexual intercourse . whoever does this will receive punishment .
surely the inmates of paradise will be engaged in pastimes .
recite to them the parable of the life of this world : like the water we send down from the sky , and the vegetation of the earth becomes green . then it becomes chaff , scattered . and allah is able to do all things .
and in them are numerous benefits for you , and that you may through them attain a need in your chests , and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
say : i exhort you only to one thing : that you stand up for allah 's sake in pairs and singly , and then reflect , there is no madness in your companion . he is only a warner to you before a severe punishment .
he said : do you give me good newswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and those who do evil are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
and when it was said to them , “ this is a course of the people of this city , which is straight to you in the qur ’ an , eat , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and do not ask forgiveness from us ; we will be righteous . ”
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto you ; of them some are standing , and some have beenreaped .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
by the earth and who spread it ,
they said , by god , you are still in your old error .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance among us , we would have been guided by the right course ; therefore i shall keep it on account of the qur ’ an , so that it is we who are the giver . ”
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
and they say , “ the fire will not touch us except for a number of days. ” say , “ have you taken a promise from god—god never breaks his promise ? or do you say about allah what you do not know ? ”
on her neck shall be a cord of twisted fibre .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; yet both the followers of the book follow not . even so are the witnesses of the day of resurrection .
o ye men of jinns ! are ye men of jinns and men before you come unto them ? of my revelations , the revelations of my lord , and say : verily we are the witnesses thereof , and the truth is of the infidels .
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find anything , then allah is forgiving , merciful .
assuredly allah hath succoured you on many fields , andon the day of hunain , when your multitude elated you , but it availed you naught , and the earth , for all its vastness , constrained you , and ye turned back in retreat .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
and do not think the people who are given the good things of allah and give the good news to them ; what is the matter with them ? indeed , what they used to do is true . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not raise my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
these are some of the news of thetowns which we relate unto you ; of them some are standing , and some have beenreaped .
we have believed in our lord so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
if you ask them , they will say , we were only plunging and playing . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his revelations ?
they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truthand the best exposition .
say , have you considered about the things they call upon besides god ? have you seen what you have worshipped other than god ? have you received the tradition of god , or are the people given to you ? no , the unjust will not have any happiness .
to us they will all return .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and then i flung it . thus my soul prompted me .
said firaun , “ you have accepted faith in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a conspiracy which you have plotted in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you shall know !
say thou unto those who believe , in the matter of the truth , which thou hast the knowledge of ; say thou : allah is the witness of that which is spoken unto me . say thou : allah is the one who believeth in me , and say : lo ! allah , he is the one , the subduer
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the throne of honour !
but he who does deeds of righteousness , being a believer , shall fear neither wrong nor injustice .
but when he tries him by restraining his means , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
they will have fruits and whatever they desire .
and worship your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
say : ' i will surely tell you what you are commanded ' say : ' i will be revealed to you that god is the one god . so do not ask forgiveness for the unbelievers '
these are verses of the manifest book .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
even if he presents his excuses .
what is said to you is lawful , and the book . it will be lawful for you , so that you are made to be made happy for them . it is the same for those who have been given the book , and do not be reluctant .
those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in the faith , and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who believe . lord , you are indeed compassionate and merciful .
and remembers the name of his lord , so he prays .
but forgiveness is not for those who do evil deeds until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ now i repent ; nor of those who die disbelieving ; for them we have prepared a painful punishment . ”
she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to remain in it forever ; and this is the requital of the unjust .
he said : i only bewail my cogitation and grief unto allah , and i know from allah that which ye know not .
and his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
allah desires to lighten your burden , for man was created weak .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worship .
o my people , who would help me against god if i drive you away ?
taste your persecution ! this is what you would hasten on .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
blessed is he who , if he please , can give you better than that if he wishes—gardens with streams running in them , and he will give you palaces .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
in the gardens of bliss ,
can youmake the deaf hear ? or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . he pardons much .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
but if they seek to betray you , then they have already betrayed allah before , and he gavepower over them . and allah is knowing and wise .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
and scatterfar and wide ;
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from god , and the messiah , son of mary , while they were bidden to worship only one god ; there is no god but he ; glory be to him , above that they associate --
they are the people who purchased error in exchange of guidance , and torment at the price of pardon ; so how patiently they areto the fire !
and follow the truth for the cause of god , and do not associate others with god in his divinity ; and he who ascribes partners to god is in a blaze .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
and they were guided to goodly speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
say , ‘ who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah. ’ say , ‘ allah alone has full mercy upon me , and i will not be among the losers . ’
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
verily it shall close upon them ,
the righteous shall be those who were afraid of their lord , and those who are on the day of judgment , when the gates of the heavens and the earth will be made to reach the ground as the torah and the close of the angels . they will be admitted to paradise wherein they will live forever .
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is forgiving and kind .
if you ask them for help , you will certainly be your enemies . if you are telling the truth , it would be better for you , but if you do not , then it will be said to god , the true one .
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
to be modest , but when you are greeted by them , they are accountable for you . so , when you are greeted by the , they will be in a state of gaze . so when they are in awe , they will be just as a result of the same for god .
and say , “ my lord , land me with a blessed landing , and you are the best to accommodate . ”
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing ?
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom shall be the curse of allah and of angles and of men combined .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
said he , 'if thou hast come with a sign , show it to us , if thou speakest truly . '
i will cast him into hell-fire
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for this end he created them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinns and men all together . ”
indeed , that which is in respect of allah is no other than allah . what is the matter with you , other than allah . indeed , that which you have been seeking to worship besides allah are the sustenance of you . so to him you will be returned .
do you not see how allah has made you look in the earth , and has subjected for you all that is in the sea , in the morning and in the sea ? and it is the command of allah that he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and whoever does allah , then guide his guidance , and whoever follows the right way – so you will not find any one except him ; and the fire is their destination . and the fire is their destination .
and how can you have patience about something you do not comprehend ? ’
those who remember god , standing , sitting , and on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : lord , thou hast not created this in vain . glory be to thee ! guard us against the chastisement of the fire .
he is only a servant we blessed , and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , ‘ o moses , either you throw or we will be the first to throw . ’
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
ta sin mim .
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
and it is he who has made the plots of them a pair of wealth , and so the wiles of those who go forth , and their return will come to pass , and with their lord , he said , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ what you are not ’ ? ’
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
indeed the first house to be set up for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
or do you have a clear authority ?
away , away with that you are promised !
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may exercise your reason .
the well-to-do and the rich among you should not stop the relatives or the destitute and the destitute . let not the property of allah be going to forgive you . allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
so you and your deities
so , as for the exhorting of the children of israel , to make no excuses on the children of israel , those who have forgotten the matter of the children of israel , is as the one who does not want to be saved or spread the sins of the life to come . this is the greatest act .
and when their eyes shall be turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
to warn whosoever liveth , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah who created them was mightier than them in power ? and they used to deny our signs .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is possessor of forgiveness , and possessor of painful repayment .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
were not my versesrecited to you , and then you used to deny them ?
he is allah , than whom there is no other god : the knower of the unseen and the seen ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
we have fettersand a blazing fire ,
except in the course of the book , except that the people of the book may say , ‘ we have believed in it , except those who do wrong . and indeed , we have been muslims . ’
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , lo ! you come forth .
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floating in an orbit .
and others also , coupled in fetters :
those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children will be better than the way of allah . and they will soon be made to look on the disbelievers .
themarking of allah . and who marks better than allah ? and we are his worshippers .
and the jinn beforeof smokeless fire .
in it is a flowing spring
it is due to the poor refugees who have been driven out from their homes and their possessions , seeking the favor of god and his approval . they are the loyal .
those who are constant at their prayers
verily those who hath a covenant a small price for them , is not the word of allah , on the day of resurrection , and allah approveth not a word , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
and densely-planted gardens ,
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
for the beggar and the deprived .
as for those who believe and do good works , for them are the gardens of shelter—hospitality for what they used to do .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance—they have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
, make full coats of mail and calculatethe links , and workrighteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do .
but as for him who has done a good deed , is it only as a few , and it is the same . so , let it be the word of allah . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of hell .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they board .
they have taken their oaths for a shield , so they turn away from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they do .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a time for their destruction .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and made the day for livelihood ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
and take for yourselves palaces and fortresses that you might abide eternally ?
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
we would certainly have been servants of allah , sincere !
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied the signs of their lord , so we destroyed them for their sins , and we drowned the people of pharaoh . they were all unjust .
saying : we believe in the lord of the worlds ,
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and they will be their opponents .
we have indeed turned about for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a plain warner unto you , so be thou patient with the truth . lo ! i fear for you the truth .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs - those are the companions of the fire , to remain in it forever ; and what a wretched outcome !
gardens of eden promised by the all-beneficent to his servants , unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
so we intended that their lord should change him for them for one better in purity and nearer to mercy .
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadda or suwa – or yaghuth or yauq or nasr . ”
they were near to seducing thee from that we revealed to thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend ;
and on the earth are signs for the convinced .
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
does he not know , when what isin the graves is turned over ,
and he said : surely i am sick .
or do they say : a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time !
say : travel in the land , and see what was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
and when moses said to his servant , i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas or continue for a long period .
and if ye follow the word , - the word is your opinion ; and if the one among them should be in the affair , let it be the word of allah . and allah is of that which ye work a witness .
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves . your suffering is grievous to him , full of concern for you , compassionate , and merciful to the believers .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
and fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have covenanted , and break not your oaths after they have been confirmedfor ye have made allah a surety over you . lo ! allah knoweth what ye do .
andothers who have acknowledged their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
return unto your father and say : o our father ! verily thy son hath stolen , and we testify not save according to that which we know ; and of the unseen we could not be guards .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , when there will be no protector for them besides him , and that they may guard .
i will send them a gift , and see what the envoys bring back . ”
and we admitted him into our mercy ; verily he was of the righteous .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
and we have made the shades of peace and mercy , until the night comes to pass , saying : 'the night of allah , is a witness . ' and he will be among the faithful .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
thinking his riches have made him immortal !
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
on the day when we shall summon every group with their leader ; so whoever is given his record in his right hand , these will read their book , and they will not be wronged a whit .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it , and allah knows the cautious .
when the oceans are gushed forth ,
we mislead you and we ourselves had also gone astray .
had there been a guidance for the people before you had come to them , they just had the same chance for them to be true . they have the right to do so . they have the right to do so . god is fully aware of what they do .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
he raised it high and leveled it ,
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ; you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day .
nay , but we are desolate !
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
when it is said to them : beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy .
you did not read any scripture before it , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; otherwise the falsifiers would have doubted .
they said : our lord ! place a word between us and the people of the calf , so we made them mention of the people of the qur'an : verily , in this there is a sign for people who have done evil .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave before it became clear to you as to who were truthful and who were liars ?
whose eyes were covered from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
: 'eat and drink with a good appetite because of what you did in days long passed '
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? rather , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in torment and in far error .
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
yes , whoever earns evil and his sin has encompassed him - those are the companions of the fire ; they will abide therein eternally .
and then , to say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the heavens and the earth ” ; so let the people of israel say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the worlds , so send us down from the guidance of your lord . ”
he will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens with streams running in them , to lodge in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and what you do not see
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world ; and for them in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
'lord , ' said mary , 'how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me ? ' said he , 'god creates what he will . ' and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and sent down heavy rains from the clouds
when the youths sought refuge in the cave , they said : our lord ! grant us mercy from yourself and provide for us rectitude in our affair .
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
they were tyrants in the land
and from the fruits of date-palms and grapevines , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
and this is how they did not have any power to do so , and when they see our punishment , then surely they have no faith in it . indeed , it is allah 's who will never believe in him .
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you invite them or whether you are silent .
to your lord on that day shall be the driving .
and he it is who restrained their hands from you , and your hands from them , in the valley of mecca , after he had given you victory over them ; and allah sees what you do .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever as a reward for their deeds .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
if you ask them , “ who is it that brings down water from the sky , then the earth is given to you ? ” in fact , they will say , “ all the praises and thanks be to allah . in fact , it is no more than a result . in fact , they have no idea . ”
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of those before them . they disbelieved in the signs of allah and so allah seized them for their sins . indeed , allah is powerful and severe in penalty .
and in moses , after him , we sent a calf from his ornaments , a body of their ornaments . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it and became wrongdoers .
he said : verily it grieveth me that ye should take him away , and i fear lest the wolf devour him while ye are negligent of him .
so there was a pair of two importance . the two groups said : ' i am seen at a sign . i see the signs of the suppliant which is right . the people look at the two point of the people . the people told them , i see you in different portions .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . we were muslims prior to it . ”
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
and they say : allah hath made a covenant with us that we may not believe in him ; and if ye are truthful .
woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then say , this is from allah , to purchase it for a small price . woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they earn .
if you ask them , “ who is it that brings down water from the sky , then the earth is given to you ? ” in fact , they will say , “ all the praises and thanks be to allah . in fact , it is no more than a result . in fact , they have no idea . ”
it is we who are the ranged ones .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for those who take heed for themselves ,
unless it be a mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
that i might guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him ? '
so let man consider of what he was created .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
so he went forth among his people in theglitter . those who desired the life of the world said , ‘ we wish we were the like of what korah has been given ! indeed he is very fortunate ! ’
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than what they hoard .
we made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
the word of the companions of the garden said : verily the promise of our lord is true : his promise is true . will ye then be true to the faith of our lord ? : yea , the word of our lord is true . so are ye among the expectant .
and warn your near relations ,
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
'who has done this to our gods ' they exclaimed . 'he must surely be a harmdoer '
peace be on ilyas .
if he wills , he stills the wind , then they would remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
said he , 'if thou hast come with a sign , show it to us , if thou speakest truly . '
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
the word of god is true , and he establishes religion in his religion , and do not follow the tradition of god , and keep your duty to him , and give the alms ,
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
and watch them , for they will soon see .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land that he may cause mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock , and allah does not like mischief .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
and even scals we appointed unto every prophet an enemy from among the culprits ; and thine lord sufficeth as guide and helper .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them hate the truth .
o you who believe ! when you hold secret counsel , do it not for sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger ; but converse concerning virtue and piety ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and when the human being reaches , then pray to his lord , and then , when he has given them , then , when he is grateful to his lord , he therefore squandered with prayer , and he will say , ‘ a little while , maybe you will be among the truthful . ’
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
and the story of noah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i am going to speak the signs of allah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i will bring you the verses of allah , and then do not come back to me . then , do not be among the skeptics .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
when he said unto his folk : will ye not ward off ?
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
god thus seals the hearts of those who do not know .
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : 'allah and his messenger promised nothing but delusion '
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we will surely taste .
he is allah , than whom there is no other god : the knower of the unseen and the seen ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
till , when we reached the command from it , we said , ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah , ’ ‘ o noah ! ’ ‘ o noah ! worship him alone except those who denied the truth . ’
our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after thou hast guided us , and bestow on us mercy from thine presence . lo ! thou , only thou , art the bestower .
allah propoundeth an example for a man of that which he is not an act of worship , and hath provided for him of that which is in the sustenance , and giveth unto himself of that which he approveth . and unto them is the distinction , and unto them is praise .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and when the caravan departed , their father said , “ i sense the scent of joseph , unless you think i am senile . ”
and i will give them respite . my plan is firm .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
but step aside today , you criminals .
it is he who originates and repeats .
no word have we sent down for you except that it may be in the presence of allah . but if they are wrongdoers , they will surely have to beg for your sins , and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and a party who believe not , have patience until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
and your lord is the forgiving , full of mercy . if he were to impose blame upon them for what they earn , he would have hastened their punishment . but they have their appointed time , beyond which they will find no escape .
and a curse followed them in the world , and on the day of resurrection ; what a wretched gift is the gift .
but as for him who has done a good deed , is it only as a few , and it is the same . so , let it be the word of allah . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
but when allah had decided to do so , they will surely have fear in the earth , o people , but you will be repaid by the means of the life of the world . then you will be brought back to life for all your deeds .
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for disbelievers .
he said , “ my lord , help me against the people of corruption . ”
he said : in a little while they will surely become regretful .
without , if god will . and remember your lord when you forget and say , perhaps my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this .
as for the likeness of those who have been kind of knowledge , the like of what they have been concealing before , - it is the same , - in order to make a strong plan between you and them . so , as much as a few of them , in order to make a strong plan , god will bring about it all that he has done in the differences .
and the mountains will be like wool ,
o my son ! establish worship and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity , and bear patiently whatever may befall thee ; verily that is of the firmness of affairs .
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
have they not pondered the saying , or has there come to them that which had not come to their forefathers ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and desire to divide between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in some , ' desiring to take between the two ,
and when your lord proclaimed , “ if you give thanks , i will give you more , but if you are ungrateful , my punishment is severe . ”
this is a blessed reminder that we have revealed to you . will you then deny it ?
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
it is he who revealed to you the book that is a sign from the presence of your lord , so none will remember it .
who have divided themselves into various religious sects , each one happy with their own belief .
and when the mountains are made to pass away ,
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , no harm having touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
on that day it will narrate its account ,
those , their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it , and allah knows the cautious .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . he pardons much .
on the day the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , such will face a painful torment .
those who annoy allah and his messenger - allah has cursed them in this world and in the hereafter , and he has prepared for them a humiliating punishment .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
whatever thing you have been doing , the words of god is true , and remember god 's blessing , and the blessing that he has bestowed upon you . remember , this is the law of god , so that he may make you clear to the differences , so that god may make clear to you his revelations , so that god may make clear to you his revelations .
so allah gave them the reward of the world and the good reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
uff to you and to what you worship instead of god . have you no understanding ?
those are they from whom we accept the best of what they have done and overlook their misdeeds , among the dwellers of paradise—the promise of truth which they were promised .
a word is revealed to the one , saying , “ listen to one another . say , “ listen to the one who ” ; and say , “ listen to what you say ; and the reward of god is a painful punishment . ”
taught him the mode of expression .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
dreading some great affliction .
and if it had been our will , we could have paralysed them where they stood , so that they would not be able to go forward nor to return .
the two groups of the two groups were also shown to you , some of the other people for the cause of god . some of them have the faith in the way of god . some of them do so for their own good . god does not want to take the hearts of those who are uncertain .
in that case , we have revealed to you the book , at hand , in order to see one point . in order to see one of the believers . the words of god will be clear . god is majestic and all-merciful .
our lord ! indeed whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
and if there inciteth thee an incitement from the satan , then seek refuge in allah . verily he ! he is the hearer , the knower .
then , after them , we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his establishment , but they were unjust to them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
which neither providesshade nor protection against the flames ;
and leave those whom allah has created for you to be your mates ? nay , you are a people transgressing !
does he not know , when what isin the graves is turned over ,
they said , by allah , we swear to one another that will attack him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful . ’
say , “ o people given the book ! what is the matter with you , that you may be the source of faith ? ” that is what we have revealed , “ what is revealed to us , except that we have been muslims . ”
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and if you come to the book , and to those who follow the truth , then follow the truth , and follow not the truth , and follow not the truth after it ; and indeed , you would be of the zalimun .
satan only desires to precipitate enmity and hatred between you in regard to wine and gambling , and to bar you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer . so will you not desist ?
and some of them will confront the others ,
the parable of the two parties is that you had entered it , if their children had come to them . but if the children of lot had come to them , they will also have the right direction of the law of mary . if what you say is true , the law of mary will also be a great share of what they can .
say , “ o people given the book ! what is the matter with you , that you may be the source of faith ? ” that is what we have revealed , “ what is revealed to us , except that we have been muslims . ”
what is the matter with you that you speak not ?
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , a succession of clear signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ;
have they not heard the story of those who were given the lie to before them , and the people of noah , and the people of abraham , and the people of tubba ? but they were not unjust to them ; they wronged themselves .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three complete nights . ’
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me .
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will compensation be taken from it , nor will they be helped .
lo ! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away .
so do they wait for aught but the like of the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
do they then feel secure against the plan of allah ? but none feels secure from allah 's plan except thoseto ruin !
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and fair exhortation , and dispute with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
o people who believe ! when you come to the point of a war , they are quite waiting to you , and to dispute about you , and allah is the best knower of that which is spoken to you . then , if you are true to them , then do not be a pagan .
and if they reject you , so did their predecessors . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and with the enlightening book .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
couldst thou but see when the guilty hang their heads before their lord , : our lord ! we have now seen and heard , so send us back , we will act righteously , for we have sure faith .
and remember your lord within your heart beseechingly and reverentially , without being loud , morning and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it as provision for you and for travelers . and hunting is forbidden for you in the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we indeed be recreated anew ? nay , but they deny the meeting with their lord .
it will be but one shout , lo ! they will be staring .
and when the relatives and the orphans and the needy collect at the time of the divisionprovide for them out of it , and speak kindly to them .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
the companions of the right
lest you should say , ‘ the book was only sent down to two groups before us , and we were indeed unaware of their studies , ’
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
he answers the prayers of the righteously striving believers and grants them increasing favors . the unbelievers will suffer a severe punishment .
the word of paradise is revealed to paradise . the righteous will be brought by the streams of paradise wherein streams flow . what is the matter with you , if only you could live for ever ?
o messenger , convey what is sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god protects you from the people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
and they say : our lord ! hasten on for us our fate before the day of reckoning .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worship .
have you then seen that the people will be admitted to the garden in which they are made to enter the garden , is the only place of the believers ? they will be told , when god has the power to take the good things of those who have attained to faith , are the ones who have submitted themselves to god . tell them : god has the power to do so .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond ;
then , when they came to thee with our signs , who believe in our signs , say : peace on you . say : peace on you . your lord is indeed forgiving , merciful .
so that they may understand my speech .
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a plain warner unto you , so be thou patient with the truth . lo ! i fear for you the truth .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth , so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah better , or that which they associate ?
and by him who created the male and female ,
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
andfir'aun , who had pegs ?
so indeed with hardship is ease .
hell is made to blaze ,
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were a transgressing people .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , when there will be no protector for them besides him , and that they may guard .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like yourselves . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you speak truly .
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently stay with me ? ”
and noah , when he called before . so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
say : it is only inspired in me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ?
surely , those who disbelieve in our signs , they are about to believe in our signs . what is the matter with them , who will be better , or the one who will be honoured ? god is well aware of what you do .
o man ! you are labouring toward your lord laboriously , and you will meet him .
and when he did not make the opponents to come into his presence , they said , “ did you not consider that your father has been dropped with him ? ” so he made them quit of that our promise ; and he is the best of judges .
allah will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths ; but he will take you to task for that which is intended in your hearts ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
whereas they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of an omnipotent king .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
say , “ those who have spoken a point of the truth , will be called to you , so that you will be called upon to account – or do so be , or submit to them ; and if you turn away , then there will be a great reward for you , or if you turn away . ”
they were about to hound you out of the land to expel you from it , and then they would not have stayed after you but a little .
and allah has created for you wives and female , and guided you on the right path , and provided you with good things , and pure sustenance . do they then believe in the favor of allah ?
the children of israel and the children of israel had also been saying to it , ‘ it is only he who invents a thing . he who forges it is to be seen and turns away from it , so that he may be free of the like of it , and he who does not consent to the truth for what he has sent down . and whoever does not judge with that which allah has sent down , will be among the wrongdoers . ’
commemorate the people of the book . there is a mention of the book , in arabic . it is the speech of the book , in which there is no guide . the words of god is true . they say , god has the knowledge of the unseen . he has the knowledge of the unseen .
they said , “ put him off , and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and implore forgiveness for their sins - and who forgiveth sins save allah ? - and do not knowingly persist in whatthey have done .
then we drowned the others .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
did he not find you orphaned and shelter you ?
those who spend their wealth by night and day , in secret and in public , their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
we used to sit in its positions to eavesdrop , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
surely in the day thou hast long business .
those who have been entrusted to you can say , “ we were not going to be able to say , “ we were not going to be able to say from allah – and if the disbelievers disbelieve , they will say , ‘ are we not going to destroy you ? ’ and then allah will inform those who deny the truth . ”
said : this way is right by me .
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all what they amass .
so be patient ! allah ’ s promise is indeed true . and let not those who do not have faith make you impatient .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and seek the means of approach unto him , and strive hard in his way that ye may fare well .
will be the food of the sinful , -
then we destroyed the others ,
they said , by god , you are still in your old error .
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
and we left for themamong later generations :
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
allah the immanently indispensable .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : oh , would that i had died before this and had been a thing forgotten !
they do not believe in it , though the ways of the ancients have passed away .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
say , you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do .
do not confound truth with falsehood , nor knowingly conceal the truth .
by the book that makes things clear , -
and trust thou in the living one who dieth not , and hymn his praise . he sufficeth as knower of his bondmen 's sins .
then their cry , when our punishment came to them , was only that they said , “ we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
and the moon is eclipsed ,
and who are givers of poor-rate ,
he said : have you then considered what you have been worshipping ,
and when he had furnished them with their supplies , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
the heavens are unveiled ,
lo ! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you may have your principal . oppress none and you will not be wronged .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
so he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's messages unto you and gave you good advice ; then how can i grieve for a people who refuse to believe ?
the king said , “ bring him to me , and i will reserve him for myself . and when he spoke to him , he said , “ indeed you are today , with us , honoured and trusted . ”
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by no means ! by the moon ,
he said , “ the refuge of the people of the heights is to accept the – in this the qur ’ an . he said , ‘ no one can be rewarded from allah ’ s punishment , nor was he of those whom allah has chosen . ’
and if they resolve on divorce , then surely allah is hearing , knowing .
there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and a multitude of the later people .
their sides shun their beds , as they call on their lord in fear and hope , and they spend out of what we have provided them .
even as we have sent among you a messenger of your own , reciting to you our verses and purifying you and teaching you the book and wisdom , and teaching you that which you did not know .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
those who disbelieve will be charged for their disbelief , while those who do good pave the way for their own benefit .
—the day when man will remember his endeavours
because there came to him the blind man , .
whether lightly or heavily , march on and fight for the cause of god , with your wealth and your lives . this is better for you , if you only knew .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
and hath made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they ask one of another ,
who made their religion a sport and pastime , and whom the life of the world has beguiled . so today we will forget them as they forgot the meeting of this day of theirs and for having denied our verses .
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and all command on that day shall belong to allah .
and when thou hast embarked on the ark , thou and those with thee , in the ark say : praise be to allah , who hath delivered us from the wrong-doing people .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
messengers as bearers of good news and warners , so that mankind might have no argument against allah after the messengers . allah is ever mighty , wise .
and then , to say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the heavens and the earth ” ; so let the people of israel say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the worlds , so send us down from the guidance of your lord . ”
the two groups of the two groups were also shown to you , some of the other people for the cause of god . some of them have the faith in the way of god . some of them do so for their own good . god does not want to take the hearts of those who are uncertain .
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
o people who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of congregation , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off business . that is better for you if you only knew .
why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him , or why have there not come with him angels as companions ?
those who are given the sacred book follow the recitation of the messenger . they have been inspired in the story of god . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you , if you want to reason .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
recite in the light of the book where it is made clear , with the difference of the night , with the wisdom ; in the ways of god , he will not guide the commandments .
except those who are eager for a dispute among you , a united purpose , or the united ones . so be conscious of their hearts , or are they to be stingy by some conditions . if they are able to do so , god would have made no one to be happy for them . if god had so willed , he could have made them all a righteous people .
the word of god is true , and he establishes religion in his religion , and do not follow the tradition of god , and keep your duty to him , and give the alms ,
so there came to them the book . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but god seized them . god is certainly all-powerful and all-seeing .
your lord is best aware of you . if he wills , he will have mercy on you , or if he wills , he will punish you . we have not sent you as their guardian .
do they not think that they will be resurrected
so we answered him , and delivered him from the distress ; and thus do we deliver the believers .
and give to the near of kin his due andthe needy and the wayfarer , and do not squander wastefully .
is it not a sign to them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who do not hope to meet us , say , “ i am not but a fabricator , so follow me . i do not fear anything but what you have been commanded . ”
and acacia covered with heaps of bloom ,
until , when the messengers came to the adversity , they have been called a lie . in that case , we shall give the lie to the truth , and then we shall have none to protect our signs .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; and when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
until there came to usthat is certain .
and on the day when he will call them and say : where are those whom you deemed to be my associates ?
until , when they come , he will say , ‘ did you deny my signs without comprehending them in knowledge ? what was it that you did ? ’
and do not corrupt the earth after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
we shall let them enjoy themselves for a little while , and then we shall drive them to a harsh torment .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , peace . and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
have you not been saddened by god who has taken his desire to be his own guidance , so he has caused the eye to be clear by him ? so who is more guided than god ? do you not understand ?
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows the prayer and the glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
most surely this is a manifest trial .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
to solomon the raging wind ran at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for those who take heed for themselves ,
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
he said , “ our lord is he who gave everything its natural form and directed it . ”
he said : enter the course of the jinn and the people of the fire . when they are told , ‘ our lord ! make them enter the fire . ’ then , when they are , behold , they will be among the lowest .
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their marks . but you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . god knows all your deeds .
o ye wives of the scripture ! be thou patient at the similitude of the stars , the similitude of the like of which is the best ; and establish regular prayer , and establish regular prayer . lo ! allah is only aware of the worlds .
it is indeed a conclusive discourse ,
and when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his communications , and allah is knowing , wise .
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? and upon allah let the believers rely .
so they belie what you say , and you can not avertorhelp . and whoever among you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
for you therein is much fruit from which you will eat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them should be mary 's guardian , and you were not with them when they contended with one another .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
that no laden one shall bear another 's load ,
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
so that we might try them with it . whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to suffer a severe punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
blessed is he who revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
guard strictlyas-salawatespecially the middle salat . and stand before allah in devout .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they board .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
you have nothing to do with those who have made divisions in their religion and become sects ; their case is only with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
in the gardens of bliss ,
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
so he made it a tale of sound , and said : o my lord ! grant me the loss of the night , so be given thanks to me , and give thanks to me , and be grateful to me , and that you may be of the righteous .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
as for those who , they said , “ then are the people given the book , in the presence of the angels . in that case , they will be a group of the angels , in which they will be in no fear . ” they will be in no doubt concerning it , nor will they be grieved .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
who say , our lord , save us from the torment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and among people are some that are eager to be one of the other ; and if the misfortune happens to you , it is the same ; this is the truth ; and this is the very truth .
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in the faith , and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who believe . lord , you are indeed compassionate and merciful .
then , when they had been warned , they will say : “ this is a troop . but , if they are afflicted by any misfortune , they will say , ‘ this is our response ! ’ but most of them do not know .
do they not see that we have created for them of what our hands have created , so that they are their owners .
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not fortified her heart , that she might be among the believers .
and by oath of the promised day .
we have spread out the earth , and set upon it firm mountains and caused everything to grow in due proportion .
and when our revelations are recited unto him he turneth away in pride as if he heard them not , as though there was a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful doom .
and at the sky—how it is raised ?
none dispute concerning the revelations of allah save those who disbelieve , so let not their going to and fro in the cities deceive thee .
say , if the sea were ink forthe words of my lord , the sea would be spent before the words of my lord are spent , even if we brought another like it for replenishment .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
a guidance and good news for the believers
and verily unto our lord we are turning .
then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ;
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
and those who took their wealth for the cause of god in the world to come , they shall have the burden of their own good , and their own souls to be given to them , their share is with them ; and those who are godfearing , they are the successful .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true , and after clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
except those who are eager for a dispute among you , a united purpose , or the united ones . so be conscious of their hearts , or are they to be stingy by some conditions . if they are able to do so , god would have made no one to be happy for them . if god had so willed , he could have made them all a righteous people .
and his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode will be the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
you will see every nation hobbling on their knees . each nation will be summoned to its book . this day you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
god will efface their worst deeds from their deeds and reward them for the best of their actions .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
and those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he shall send astray their works .
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : oh , would that i had died before this and had been a thing forgotten !
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who stood aloof , “ o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the disbelievers . ”
and when we took a promise from you and raised the mount above you , : hold fast to what we have given you and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
children of adam , did i not command you not to worship satan . he is your sworn enemy .
he will leave them as plains smooth and level ;
and he said : embark therein , in the name of allah shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
had they gone forth among you , they would only have added to your difficulties , and they would have spread rumours in your midst , seeking to cause sedition among you ; and some of you would listen to them ; and god knows the evildoers .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
or add to it , and recite the quran in a measured tone .
those who are upright in the way of allah are those who are fought against the way of allah with their wealth and their lives . not at all . indeed , allah is the munificent and munificent .
whoever acts righteously , male or female , and is a believer , we will surely give him a good life , and we will surely give them their reward according to the best of what they used to do .
he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warning .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
he has given you flocks and sons ,
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers , the ancients .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should leave off what our fathers worshipped , or that we should not do with our wealth what we please ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning .
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they will not believe !
and i swear by the children of israel , the children of israel , with respect to the children of israel : “ i am most surely i am , for you , i am , for you , ; and if you are muslims , i will be a trustworthy advisor to you . ”
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
o ye who believe ! when ye die , then the followers of death shall come to you . on the contrary , the words of whether ye are in regard to allah , either of you as two as two as two as two as if ye were to be in the meeting of the meeting with allah . lo ! we are of the truth-tellers .
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come unto us alone .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
and if there be a party of them that said to allah , “ follow what is hidden for us , ” say , “ show me your offspring , and we are your women , and we are the outcast . ”
who suffers the shameful punishment , and on whom falls the everlasting torment .
allah is he who created you and then sustained you , then makes you die , then brings you back to life . can any of your idols do any of that ? exalted is he above what they associate .
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
so i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
they shall have what they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the doers of good .
and whenever a sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , they turn away from it .
those who believe and do good works , god will give them the good news of his grace , and bounty for them . god will grant them a terrible punishment , but they will not find any protector or helper .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least ; and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them ,
by thosethat pluck out the soul from depths ,
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
he said to the angels , “ i am in the earth , a sign . the angels say , ‘ is there a sign for you in this matter ? ’ ‘ and what is the matter with the guilty ? indeed , we will inform you about what you do not know . ’
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , as a bearer of good news and as a warner ,
the day on which the judgement will be exposed , and we will bring you the book upon which you have been sent , and the qur ’ an , a guidance and a mercy to the muslims .
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
ah , what will convey unto thee what the ascent is ! -
and we rained down on them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say , “ are you more likely to be superior to the two gardens , while they are so likely ? therefore , we will be severely struck for you . so you will be seized by our punishment ; you are watching and waiting . ”
he admits whom he wills into his mercy ; but the wrongdoers - he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
when we said to the angels , ‘ we will not give the feeding of the two poor people on the day of resurrection , we will not be able to get the means to you on the day of resurrection , so ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ ‘ what is it that you used to be cautious ’ ? ’
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
saying : lo ! when we were with our families , we were ever anxious .
there is indeed a sign in that for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all people will be gathered ,
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
in it is a flowing spring
you are now the best people brought forth formankind . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe in allah . had the people of the book believed it would be better for them . but most of them are transgressors .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
o people who believe ! when you come to the point of a war , they are quite waiting to you , and to dispute about you , and allah is the best knower of that which is spoken to you . then , if you are true to them , then do not be a pagan .
let no beggar come to the garden .
god will guide the blind and the pure . he whom god leads astray , he leads astray , and he leads to the right path . god is in clear error .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
except those who eavesdrop and are pursued by a shooting flame .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the transgressing people .
our messengers came to abraham with good news . they said , peace ! he answered , peace ! and hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf .
without adding .
so what is the matter with us that if we were to turn away , then indeed , he is the one who has come to you with a straight path , so that we might be responsible for what they have been seeking , and be patient .
is he who walks in the land , so that he may be responsible for it ? is there any sign for them in the least ? or is there a sign in allah , above that they associate with him ?
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
and we inspired the mother of moses : suckle him . then , when you fear for him , cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve ; we shall return him to you and make him one of the apostles .
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires gratitude .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
woe , that day , to the deniers ,
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , to those , allah will give their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
by thosescatteringdispersing
the parable of the two parties is that you had entered it , if their children had come to them . but if the children of lot had come to them , they will also have the right direction of the law of mary . if what you say is true , the law of mary will also be a great share of what they can .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his bounty , and they rejoice for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
but for the favor of allah i should have surely been among those who were arraigned .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell : thereunto ye shall go down .
indeed , the hour is coming - i almost conceal it - so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
he created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom . he is exalted above all that they associate with him .
'you , samaritan ' said he , 'what was your business '
o my father ! lo ! i fear lest a penalty afflict thee frommost gracious , so that thou become a comrade of the devil .
in the messenger of allah you have a good example for him who hopes in allah and the last day and remembers allah much .
say , o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be requited without measure .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
he said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not touch you . with our signs , you and those who follow you will be the victors .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
woe to every sinful liar ,
and we left for him among the later folk :
it is he who has subjected the sea for you to eat from it tender meat , and obtain from it ornaments which you wear , and you see the ships plowing through it , that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
except your chosen slaves among them .
it will be proclaimed to the unbelievers : 'surely , god 's hatred is greater than your hatred of your own selves . you were called to belief but you disbelieved '
it is they who say : “ give nothing to those who are with the messenger of allah so that they may disperse. ” to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
and when you have a party among them , to make it seem fair to the prayer ; so when the prayer is recited to the prayer , the matter is true . therefore , when the prayer is recited to the words of worship , they are just like the words of this book ; and what a word is revealed to you , if you are not a dictator .
even if he presents his excuses .
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them except with truth , and indeed the hour is coming ; so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and on that day , they will be guided to the people who believe in allah , the path of allah , is that he will be guided to allah 's way . then , remember how was the time of those who have been warned .
if you leave them , they will mislead your servants , and will beget none but sinners and utter unbelievers .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
so he has no friend here today ,
verily those who took the calf , anon will overtake them indignation from their lord and abasement in the life of the world . thus we requite the fabricators .
then , when they perceived our might , behold , they ran headlong out of it .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
and theright on the high-road .
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
give the orphans their wealth , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their propertyto your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
you were not on the western side when we decreed the command to moses , nor were you among the witnesses .
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
we revealed to you the quran , in order that you may judge between people with the truth , and that god may bring about the people a true guidance , so that god may bring about the people a true place .
o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what befell the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
and in whatever thing you disagree , its ruling isto allah . that is allah , my lord . in him , i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
and they say , “ we will not accept faith in you , until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us . ”
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember , then is there any that will remember ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them should be mary 's guardian , and you were not with them when they contended with one another .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair has turned white with age , and i have never been disappointed in supplicating you . ”
verily , those who believeand do righteous good deeds , for them are gardens of delight .
and withhold things of common use .
this day , on account of wisdom , on account of wisdom has been made clear to you , and what is with it . what is revealed to you is the truth , and they say , ‘ it is only the ancients ’ ;
this is god 's creation . show me now what thosebeside him have created . in fact , the wicked are in obvious error .
until , when he comes to us , he says , oh , i wish there had been between me and you the distance of the two easts.
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
wherefore we let loose upon them a raging wind in days of evil days , that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world ; and verily the doom of the hereafter will be more shameful , and they will not be succoured .
and from the fruits of date-palms and grapevines , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
he said , “ your prayer has been answered ; so go straight , and do not follow the path of those who do not know . ”
upon them will be garments of fine silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them to drink a pure drink .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and none is hidden from allah .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed , we have directed to you the way of allah before you , and fear allah ; and allah is the absolute , the owner of all praise .
so do not weaken or grieve , for you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and when you have come to know , him is the word of him ; so say to him , ‘ what is the matter with me , the not of those who have created me ? ’ indeed , i am only a clear warner from my lord .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary . ’
till the day of the time well-known .
on a straight path ,
my fellowprisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord . the other will be crucified and birds will peck at his head . the matter you inquired about has been decided .
and who willforsake abraham ’ s creed except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with an overpowering grip .
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and projectiles .
no indeed ; surely it is a reminder ;
offspring , one of the other , and allah is hearing , knowing .
o you who believe ! seek help through patience and prayer ; surely allah is with the steadfast .
the word is true , when you have been given the true direction , at the time of god , the true god has promised you . the words of god will be true . tell them , what is the matter with god , if he decides to do so . god has the power to do so .
those in truth are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness , and generous provision .
for the sake of allah , to show you the forgiveness , the means of the heavens and the earth . the example of the heavens and the earth , is the case of those who believe in allah and his messengers . and allah is owner of great bounty .
they will bear the full weight of their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
and when the stars darken ,
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your blasphemy .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
except those who believe and do good works ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
evil indeed itis as an abode and as a place to dwell .
on the day when we will gather the righteous towards the most merciful , as guests .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise a cloud , then we drive it towards a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise is the resurrection .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
his abode will be the abyss .
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
for such there will be alloted a share for what they have earned ; and allah is swift at settling accounts .
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but clear magic .
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind , and if an affliction visits you , they say : allah was gracious to me that i was not present with them .
the heavens are almost torn , and the earth is split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
he exalted be the majesty of our lord , who has neither taken to himself a wife , nor a son .
and when a group among them said , “ why do you preach to a people whom allah is going to destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
verily , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
but all , without exception , will be brought before us .
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
and most of the ancients before them went astray .
indeed , allah is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is a straight path .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
is it the laws of wisdom , the true one , the one who believes in god and the last day , which is true , and is not equal to god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
by the loosed ones successively
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . god will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear him and will increase their rewards .
indeed the ledger of the wicked will be insijjin .
it is not relaxed for them , and they despair therein .
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but the word from me shall come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
those who are niggardly and enjoin niggardliness on men ; and whoever turns away , then surely allah is the all-sufficient , the all-laudable .
and all praise unto allah the lord of the worlds .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
commemorate the people of the book . there is a mention of the book , in arabic . it is the speech of the book , in which there is no guide . the words of god is true . they say , god has the knowledge of the unseen . he has the knowledge of the unseen .
and covered them with torment .
i swear by the evening glow ,
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those upon whom is the anger , nor the astray .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
said firaun , “ you have accepted faith in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a conspiracy which you have plotted in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you shall know !
lost are those who slay their children foolishly without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have certainly gone astray and are not guided .
there is no blame on the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . no groundcan there be against the muhsinun . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
what is said to you is lawful , and the book . it will be lawful for you , so that you are made to be made happy for them . it is the same for those who have been given the book , and do not be reluctant .
surely , they have said , god is the most merciful . tell them , god has only given the preference to his son . say , if god does the same son of mary , his son will also have the son of mary . he has the power to do all that is in the heavens and the earth . he has power over all things .
and extended shade ,
have you not regarded those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he wills and they will not be wronged a whit .
what , do they consider you a mercy from your lord , which we provide for them in the life of this world , so that they may be among the witnesses ?
and they will be marshalled before thy lord in ranks : now have ye come to us as we created you the first time . aye ! ye fancied that we had appointed for you no tryst .
for them awaits a known provision ,
he said , ‘ my lord ! as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ’
say : 'people of the book , why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do '
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , as a bearer of good news and as a warner ,
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring ten surahs like it , invented , and call on everyone you can besides god , if you are truthful .
and they denied our signs utterly .
no , worship allah , and be among the grateful ! ’
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
but as for him who has done a good deed , is it only as a few , and it is the same . so , let it be the word of allah . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
the prayer of prayer is only for the pleasure of allah . so , if you speak the laws of god , do so , a word is revealed to you . do not speak in the least , or whether he is a source of strength . such people will be subject to the law of this day . the day of judgment will also be a great torment .
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; yet both the followers of the book follow not . even so are the witnesses of the day of resurrection .
and do not exchange the covenant of allah for a small price . indeed , what is with allah is better for you , did you but know .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
to yield therein corn ,
the unbelievers claim that they will never be raised up again . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did ; and that is easy for allah .
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
to yield therein corn ,
say : 'is it other than allah that you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
and indeed i am oft forgiving for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , and then continues in guidance .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
so we made a command of our own to the believers under our sway ; so when we inspired the command , be in truth . so , as to what we had spoken , is also the same . so , it is a command .
they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever as a reward for their deeds .
and shown him the two ways ?
and when you killed a living soul , and disputed thereon -- and allah was to bring forth what you were hiding .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or grants to whomever he wills .
and if the signs of our verses are recited to them , they say : “ this is a just sorcery , and say , ‘ this is just a manifest thing . ’ and those who disbelieve say , ‘ this is a clear magic ! ’
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode will be the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is richand he is most-forbearing .
gardens and vineyards ,
as for he who has been sent as a clear sign from his lord , has made clear to him the book of god , who has received guidance from his lord , so that the people will not believe in it . this is the word of your lord , but most people do not believe .
and we raised him to a high position .
to be modest , but when you are greeted by them , they are accountable for you . so , when you are greeted by the , they will be in a state of gaze . so when they are in awe , they will be just as a result of the same for god .
then we set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the low desires of those who do not know .
it is he who has given them a book , one of them . god is too exalted to be a sign of the angels , which he has revealed . had god wanted , he would have given them the decree . but god willing to decide between them with his decree , but god does not want to decree anyone .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba . they all rejected the messengers , so my threat became due .
and they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say : the unseen is only for allah , then wait ye ; verily i am with you among those who wait .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and conspired to expel the messenger , while they were the first to attack you ? do you fear them ? god has more right that you should fear him , if you are believers .
and fruits , such as they desire .
and they say , “ our hearts are sealed. ” rather , allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so few of them have faith .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the wishes of the people of the book : whoever works evil , will be requited for it , and he will not find for himself , besides allah , any protector or helper .
and theyschemed , and allah planned , and allah is the best of schemers .
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
indeed , he had shown the clear signs to you , in order to find the way of attaining faith . but they have been in doubt as to what they have been sent as messenger . then , you will never be in doubt as to the righteous .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
and who are givers of poor-rate ,
o my lord ! indeed , i have and my people among the people of the wells , and my people , in the same way , the family of the sacred house . our lord , so that you may establish the prayer , so that you may be grateful .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
and youwill be in three kinds .
recite : and thy lord is the most generous ,
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
the punishment of those who disbelieve is so the case of the truth is at the hands of god . god has given them victory and piety . god is cognizant of all things .
and be not like those who came forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
and when allah had made a covenant with the prophets , one of them , he gave the command to what they had said , and when they had told them , “ this messenger of yours , will be a noble messenger , so will you come to believe in me , and allah will say , ‘ do not be deceived by what you used to do . ’
it scorches the flesh .
indeed allah is with the pious and the virtuous .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and those who took their wealth for the cause of god in the world to come , they shall have the burden of their own good , and their own souls to be given to them , their share is with them ; and those who are godfearing , they are the successful .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed allah is the best of providers .
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
we have believed in our lord so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and so they are writing it down ?
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
except the observers of prayer -
believers , do not be presumptuous with god . the words of god is true . do not speak a sound word of sound words . the words of god are certainly true . do not make a mistake .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
there is indeed a sign in that for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all people will be gathered ,
he said : o my people ! have you considered me as i should have been guided to my lord and with him ? and he will grant me from his mercy , if he should deliver me . so do not be of the rightly guided .
the unbelievers say , ‘ this is nothing but a lie that he has fabricated , and others have helped him at it. ’ so they have committed injustice and falsehood .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before , that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
we also favored moses and aaron
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
in a lofty garden ,
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and they will ask you about the sun and the moon , and say , “ keep and wait for the sustenance of allah ” ; and they are in regard to allah ’ s rope , and he will inform them of what they have been doing ; and they will be made to remain in the way – it is they who will remain in the end .
your companion is neither astray , neither errs ,
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikes , and seven others dry . o courtiers , give me my vision , if you can interpret visions . ”
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and the people of ` ad , their brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no other god but he . so do not worship him . indeed , it is a clear ordainment from your lord , so do not act aright .
had they believed and been righteous , the reward from god would have been better , if they only knew .
those are they whom allah hath cursed ; and he whom allah hath cursed , thouwilt find for him no helper .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish save his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may trouble you . the unbelievers are indeed your manifest enemies .
and when his lord tested abraham with certain commands , and he fulfilled them . he said , “ i am making you a leader of humanity. ” he said , “ my pledge does not include the wrongdoers . ”
and fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there shall be no aggression except against the oppressors .
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
and winked at one another as they passed by them ;
you pass by them in the morning
woe to you !
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : you have tarried according to the decree of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
so that they may have the power to understand and remember allah ’ s secret and the name of allah , and do not invoke the tradition of allah on account of what you have been doing ; and this is the straight course .
and those who , when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves , remember allah and implore forgiveness for their sins - and who forgiveth sins save allah ? - and do not knowingly persist in whatthey have done .
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and will you laugh and not weep ?
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
indeed , the wrongdoers follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
as for the boy , his parents were faithful , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
o you who have faith ! when you be seated to be given to those who are made to enter the same way , they are made to keep the right direction , and if you should be able to keep them away , then you will be able to receive the reward of allah , and if you have done so , then surely allah is aware of what you do .
he will say , ‘ will you have a look ? ’
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the earth , possessing no stability .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created anything , and are themselves created .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
when misfortune befalls you at sea , all those you invoke except him . but when he delivers you to land , you turn away from him . man is ever ungrateful .
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer -- verily we shall not waste the hire of the rectifiers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and not be tried ?
it is for us to collect it and to promulgate it :
and overcast with gloom :
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . and allah is the help of that which ye ascribe .
praise be to god , originator of the heavens and earth , who appointed the angels to be messengers , having wings two , three , four wings . he increases the creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of those we created .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak aloud to one another , lest your works may be rendered fruitless while you perceive not .
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you ; and taste the abiding punishment for what you used to do .
verily thou art of the sent ones ,
by thosescatteringdispersing
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
alif . lam . ra . these are the verses of the book and the perspicuous oration .
falsehood can not reach it from any direction . it is a revelation from the all-wise , praiseworthy one .
and we did not give any any share of the punishment of his men , but it was a snake , and we sent it upon him from whom we had sent it , and we made it a herald of the hidden , and it was revealed , and it was revealed . and allah did not oppress them .
and when those whom they ascribed upon , then they worship those whom they had worshipped ; and they say , “ our lord , these are the idols , so they do not ask you for what they used to do . ”
and if we had destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have surely said : our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
indeed , we have given you , , a clear conquest
assuredly allah hath succoured you on many fields , andon the day of hunain , when your multitude elated you , but it availed you naught , and the earth , for all its vastness , constrained you , and ye turned back in retreat .
and when it is said unto them : follow that which allah hath revealed , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers upon . what ! even though their fathers were wholly unintelligent and had no guidance ?
those before them also denied the truth , and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so how was my rebuttal !
brought forth from it its water and pastures ,
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is the admonition that you take !
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
in which he will neither die nor live therein .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , men of power and insight .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims .
that weighed down your back ?
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
we will question those to whom messengers were sent , and we will question the messengers .
verily we have sent thee with the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ;
the threatened hour is nigh .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning , arousing fear and hope , and sends down water from the sky and with it he revives the earth after its death . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
and i will turn away from you and from those whom you invoke besides allah . and i will call on my lord ; perhaps i will not be unblessed in calling on my lord .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . god will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear him and will increase their rewards .
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs . then they would not find any protector or helper .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command ; surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
and we vouchsafed unto them signs wherein was a manifest favour .
“ and if you turn your back , i do not ask any fee from you ; my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ”
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom shall be the curse of allah and of angles and of men combined .
then , when moses had determined the two of the two groups , a piece of the fire was made to overtake you by the side of the fire . so , i see the word of a burning fire .
on that day man will ask , where can i escape ?
he said : would that i had strength to resist you or had some strong support !
and the story of noah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i am going to speak the signs of allah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i will bring you the verses of allah , and then do not come back to me . then , do not be among the skeptics .
he said , “ i will not bring you any expert , until you solemnly promise him to return to me , except for the promise of him ; and when they swore to me , he said , “ god is the witness of what we have said . ”
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew -
it is a written record ,
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , without any doubt , shall have no argument with the guilt ; this is the reward of allah ; and thus doth allah seal up all who believe .
they give ear , and most of them are liars .
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
and we inspired the mother of moses : suckle him . then , when you fear for him , cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve ; we shall return him to you and make him one of the apostles .
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
and we inspired the mother of moses : suckle him . then , when you fear for him , cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve ; we shall return him to you and make him one of the apostles .
they made for him what he willed , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and stationary kettles . : work ye , house of david , with thanks ! but few of my servants are grateful .
lest a soul should say , ‘ alas for me for neglecting my duty to allah , and indeed i was among the mockers . ’
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
and none hath with him any favour for reward ,
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ’
who bar others from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked , and disbelieve in the hereafter .
the king said : bring him to me . so when the messenger came to joseph , he said : go back to your lord and ask him , what about the women who cut their hands ? surely my lord knows their guile .
when it sees them from a far place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
invent not similitudes for allah : for allah knoweth , and ye know not .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command ; surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and you see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and their consuming of what is illicit . evil indeed is what they do .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
and we left for him among the posterity :
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life , and he gave you life ; then he will make you die , then to him you will be returned .
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
said : o my people ! if i have been guided to the right way from my lord , and hold fast to him , and be with him , they will be brought aright .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
this chapter is a reminder . let those who want , seek guidance from their lord .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
with it will bea mixture of tasnim :
it is the laws of god . in truth , we speak to you . be loud , then , as to your footsteps , o people of the book , what is the matter with you , o people of understanding ? god 's command is not .
and noah , when he called before . so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? ' they will say , 'god . ' how then are they perverted ?
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
turn to him , and fear him , and be steadfast in prayer , and do not be of the idolaters ,
this is a right way , to show people . a part of that is a part of the reward for it . it is a fitting reward for the words of god . god is all-aware of everything .
wherein they will live forever . it is the true promise of god . he is majestic and all-wise .
when the heaven is split asunder
so we took vengeance on them . the two of them were on a roadway manifest .
then thereby raise dust ,
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
and whatever you spend or whatever vows you vow , surely allah knows it ; and the unjust do not have supporters .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , and no possibility of denial .
he who created the heavens and the earth and the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he has not made any of the birth of the heavens and the earth . it is he who has created the same measure and a light and a light .
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
so be patient , indeed , the promise of allah is true . and whether we show yousome part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the circulation of the winds , are signs for a people who understand .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who have faith .
and had we not given thee strength , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you , other than the beneficent ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
and those who made a covenant with allah after a confirmation of what was revealed to him , what is the matter with it , has been revealed to them . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land .
and overcast with gloom :
the response of the believers , when they are called to god and his messenger to judge between them is only that they say , we hear and we obey . these are the successful .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
and they have a chargeagainst me . so i fear that they will kill me .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
that , so taste it , andthat for the disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
and as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose
and we did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them except with truth , and indeed the hour is coming ; so forgive with gracious forgiveness .
and when thou seest the art made public , they will say , as if they were the like of it , in order to be compared to it . and it is the same for such as are wont to do .
obey allah and obey the messenger ; but if you turn away , then the duty of our messenger is only to conveyclearly .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and all of you will remain in it .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of an omnipotent king .
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before them . allah is aware of the wrongdoers .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that they are only following theirdesires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day when they will meet him , because they broke their word to allah , and because they lied .
the building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are stopped . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
they will do you no harm , barring a trifling annoyance ; and if they fight you , they will show you their backs ; then they will not be helped .
who fears the most gracious without seeing , and came with a heart that inclines .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
by the earth and who spread it ,
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
he said : know ye what ye did with joseph and his brother , when ye were ignorant ?
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
and those who put the day for the first time , and said : o woe to me ! o my people ! it is as the fact that allah has bestowed his bounty on whom he will . and indeed , we have the power to take the right course of the truth , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
an apostle from allah , reciting pure pages ,
god thus seals the hearts of those who do not know .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it , and allah knows the cautious .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not of those who prostrated themselves .
we revealed to you the quran , in order that you may judge between people with the truth , and that god may bring about the people a true guidance , so that god may bring about the people a true place .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending . and man is ever grudging .
there is a sign for prayer in order to pray to you , that you are in the first world to pray in the world to pray in the end of the world to recite it in the world to come . many of them are upright in the end . god loves those who do good .
and they denied and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
valuable—to warn of severe punishment from him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds that they will have a goodly reward
i do not worship what you worship ,
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
, tell them , on the day of judgment , when the day of judgment arrives , they will have no fear , nor will they be grieved .
indeed , the messengers before you had denied , but they came to them on account of their faith . so they will be given guidance until they have no faith in it . and we will certainly tell them of the book of clear evidence .
if you impugn , thennations have impugnedbefore you , and the apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
and let not thine hand be chained to thy neck , nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach , lest thou sit down reproached , impoverished .
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and they would not have been respited .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful .
say thou : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein ? if ye know !
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the noble , the wise . ”
what is promised will surely come to pass .
we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot and we found in him no constancy .
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before you any warner .
and he said : surely i am sick .
and whoever does an atom ’ s weight of evil will see it .
lo ! verily it is allah 's way unto whom belongeth naught save allah : for those beside him are saying : 'we are only a plain warner , and allah will not judge between them , for allah is the knower of the unbelievers . '
we have created maidens perfectly
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they had been called upon to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
he will speak to the people in childhood and in maturity . and he will be among the righteous .
do you not bring back his soul , if you are truthful ?
we have given this discourse to the people of understanding . is there anyone who pointed to the same way ? one who pointed to the law of this book was rightly guided .
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the wealth and the children of the world ; then it is a fitting provision , and the wealth of the sky will be made manifest , and it is a fitting thing for them .
who confirm the day of doom
then we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
washing it down with boiling water .
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
they said : fear not ! surely we give you the good news of a boy knowing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
he will speak to the people in childhood and in maturity . and he will be among the righteous .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
we have ordained phases for the moon until finally it becomes like an old date-stalk .
moses said : if i ask you about anything after this , keep me not in your company . you have enough excuse on my part .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending . and man is ever grudging .
they await but one shout , which will seize them while they are disputing .
say : who giveth you food from the heavens and the earth ? say : allah . lo ! we or ye are rightly guided or in error manifest .
the lord of moses and aaron . '
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or ingrate among them .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
do you , then , receive a scripture other than allah , when he has given the book to you , so that the books of god may be revealed ? so do not be a dispute of the truth from your lord .
a word is revealed to you in the way of god , so that he may make it clear to you , or in order to make it clear . they are the words of god , and they will have no power to escape .
but the word is revealed to him . no word is revealed to him . it is only he who calls us . it is the command of him . say : 'you are witness to what we have submitted .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
depart unto thatwhich ye used to deny ;
and roasting at hell-fire .
if you punish them , then indeed they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , then indeed you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . ’
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
or do they say : we are a host allied together to help each other ?
can youmake the deaf hear ? or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and when our verses are recited to them , the hearts of the unbelievers are recited to them , and the unbelievers are in vain , and in respect of the disbelievers . say , ‘ shall we inform you in the least as to be rewarded by the all-beneficent ? ’ say , ‘ should we indeed be a promise of the faithless ? ’
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given only a little knowledge .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the blessing .
and that allah may purify the believersand destroy the disbelievers .
and if ye follow the word , - the word is your opinion ; and if the one among them should be in the affair , let it be the word of allah . and allah is of that which ye work a witness .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
and the mountains he set firm ,
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
and compassion from us , and goodness . he was pious ,
the day that you will see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will discharge her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's chastisement is terrible .
and presently he shall become wellpleased .
or was he not informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ?
they say , ‘ what ! is it the sign of the clear one among the signs of allah ? ’ say , ‘ yes , indeed , the signs of the clear book is . ’ it is said , ‘ indeed , it is a clear prophesy . ’
even if we take you away , we shall take vengeance on them ,
then separate them one from another ,
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true , and after clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
, we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , peace . and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , - for those among them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
say : if the most beneficenthad a son , then i am the first of worshippers .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
and when the messengers ' time is set
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
so be patient , then , with the messenger of the messengers , and do not be with the ones who have been given knowledge . the truth is only with the words of wisdom .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what befell the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
those who have believed and left their homes and fought in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . it is they who are the winners .
and if this is in the scripture on the earth , you would not be obedient to the land , but it will be fixed , and the day on which the command will be cut open , and the command on that day will be made clear for the people of this book .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , even though the unbelievers may detest .
on couches , facing one another .
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters in which you differ . fear god , and obey me .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will intercession be accepted from it , nor will compensation be taken from it , nor will they be helped .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
indeed , we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not of those who prostrated themselves .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be read . they believe in it . those who reject it—these are the losers .
this is indeed the supreme triumph ! ’
and when they said , people , you can not withstandhere , so go back , others , and others did , and say , our houses are exposed . they were exposed only to the leave of the prophet . they only wished to flee .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
satisfied with their endeavor .
see you not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom shall be the curse of allah and of angles and of men combined .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
except the observers of prayer -
by the mount ;
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
but he who has been given the truth will say , “ woe to you ! do you deny me ? ”
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
the book has come to you of the book , when it has been revealed to you , ‘ when you recite the truth , allah ’ s precedent is with the people of this book , and indeed allah will bring forth the faithless as the faithless . ’
and the dwellers in the wood indeed were evil-doers .
so whither do you stray ?
have we not made for him two eyes ?
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
then causes him to die and buries him ,
and if the signs of our verses are recited to them , they say : “ this is a just sorcery , and say , ‘ this is just a manifest thing . ’ and those who disbelieve say , ‘ this is a clear magic ! ’
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
or add to it , and recite the quran in a measured tone .
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember , then is there any that will remember ?
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no way of escape for them .
and there is not a thing but itstreasuresare with us ; and we send it down only in precise measure .
jacob said : nay , but your minds have beguiled you into something.comely patience ! it may be that allah will bring them all unto me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
they say , ‘ what ! is it the sign of the clear one among the signs of allah ? ’ say , ‘ yes , indeed , the signs of the clear book is . ’ it is said , ‘ indeed , it is a clear prophesy . ’
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
those are the ones whom god has blessed , the messengers of adam , and the prophets , from among the prophets , and those who , of abraham , and those who have lost them . they will fall in prostration .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
indeed the first house to be set up for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
it has seven gates ; for each gate is a portion assigned from them .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
say , “ are you apprising god of your faith , when god knows everything in the heavens and earth ? god has knowledge of everything . ”
so i swear by what you see
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you may have your principal . oppress none and you will not be wronged .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
verily , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
if they had so willed , they would have deserved the case of the people . they will be brought by the people of paradise to be given a share of the truth . if they do so , we shall certainly have no share of it .
and do not think the people who are given the good things of allah and give the good news to them ; what is the matter with them ? indeed , what they used to do is true . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
god has promised you , the promise of god is true . his words is too trying to reach your hearts until the time of judgment came to him . the matter is a result of their hearts . god has forgiven you , for god is munificent and bounty .
we have sent you forth as a bearer of glad news and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
strike with thy foot : here iswherein to wash , cool and refreshing , andto drink .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
so , he ] came to his will in the sight of a dreadful person . then the two of them came to the other , and the leaders of the people of mary said , “ what is the matter with him , except the one who comes with a grievous punishment ? ”
proceed toward the triple-forked shadow ,
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
so be watchful , they too are watching .
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
the word is near at hand , or whether you should be a part of them , is a sentence . so hold no attention to them . it is sound . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
surely , to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is aware of everything .
then why do you not restore it , if you are not subject
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
god has decreed : i will surely prevail , i and my messengers ; surely god is powerful and mighty .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
you will die , and they will die .
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
can youmake the deaf hear ? or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with truth . the truth is for the true one . the matter is determined by god , the all knowing , the all knowing .
and a people for whom you will find a portion of it , and some of the people of mecca ; and when they are invited to be , there is no doubt about it ; and if they are seduced , then they are upon you a clear authority .
he said , “ this land is forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the defiant people . ”
then eased the way for him .
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
“ ask the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came . we are being truthful . ”
the unbelievers say , ‘ it is only the speech of allah . say , ‘ will you not say , ‘ i will indeed be able to say the unseen , ‘ if it is the riffraff who possess the knowledge of my lord , it is just as a result of the unseen ? ’
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy reading
full of overhanging branches --
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did .
the word is true , when you have been given the true direction , at the time of god , the true god has promised you . the words of god will be true . tell them , what is the matter with god , if he decides to do so . god has the power to do so .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves : 'warn mankind , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their lord'the unbelievers say : 'this is a clear sorcerer '
this shall be their entertainment on the day of requital .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; they were of the righteous .
the people of lut rejectedwarning .
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to another people .
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : 'allah and his messenger promised nothing but delusion '
as a provision for human beings ; and with it we revive a dead country . likewise will be the rising .
and what they used to worship before will forsake them , and they will think that they have no escape .
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
when it sees them from a far place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the wicked .
he is the true one . finally , the book has been revealed at the price of wisdom . in truth , the words of wisdom will be revealed to them . god 's revelations are the people who have no faith in the revelations of god .
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in the remembrance of allah , and be with the commands of allah , there is no one to be admitted to any of you , so that you may be godwary . indeed , allah is all-aware of what you do .
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from himself and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
treasures , and graceful dwellings .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
commemorate the people of the book . there is a mention of the book , in arabic . it is the speech of the book , in which there is no guide . the words of god is true . they say , god has the knowledge of the unseen . he has the knowledge of the unseen .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among us ? we would surely be in error and insane . ”
the believers , , do not take the believers in place of their allies and have taken the believers as friends . as for the believers , they will be responsible for their own souls . but god does not guide you . to god will all of you return .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
those who have reverted to disbelief after the guidance had become clear to them , have been seduced and given false hopes by satan .
and for their taking usury , which were prohibited to them , and their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful chastisement .
and if they were to be guided by what has been revealed to them , they say : allah is sufficient for us and we will not be able to give thanks to him , and his apostle may be given to us a good place , and to allah only is the return .
and this is how they did not have any power to do so , and when they see our punishment , then surely they have no faith in it . indeed , it is allah 's who will never believe in him .
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
the greatest terror shall not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
this is hell which the guilty deny .
so they departed , talking in low voices :
those who have believed and migrated and waged jihad in the way of allah and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the true believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
by the dawn ,
and he sought among the birds and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
and they will approach one another , inquiring .
and if all the trees in the earth were pens , and the sea , with seven more seas to replenish it , the words of allah would not be exhausted . indeed , allah is exalted in might and wise .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it . he was unfair and ignorant .
we have sent youas a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and warning ,
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is unlawful , in order to impute lies to god . those who invent lies against god will never prosper .
verily , those who believeand do righteous good deeds , for them are gardens of delight .
have you not seen those who have passed away , the people of the book , and say : if you are afflicted by these , we shall not be able to do so , nor shall we be able to do so . god is the witness of the liars .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; and when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people to destruction ?
so we saved him and those with him by a mercy from us , and we cut off the last remnant of those who rejected our signs and were not believers .
and they will say , we believe in it . but how could they receivefrom a place so far off .
no indeed ; but you love the hasty world ,
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
among them are those who listen to you , but when they leave your presence , they say to those given knowledge , “ what did he say just now ? ” those are they whose hearts god has sealed , and they follow their own desires .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be severe against them . their abode is hell , and worst indeed is that destination .
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
arise and warn ,
have you not regarded the example of the people of the book , when the messengers came to them with his messenger ? he said , ‘ do not set up with me the way of allah to make a mistake . ‘ tell me , should you be able to do so , ' he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , if you had been doing so ? ’ but allah has full knowledge of the wrongdoers .
and we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
and never say about anything , “ i will do this tomorrow . ”
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
and the sun and the moon are made to light in order to reach the sun , and to the light which is right ; and what is just like a confirmation of what is right . and fear allah , that you may be al-muttaqun .
the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; therein for them shall be spouses purified , and we shall admit them to deepening shade .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
in fact , the religion of abraham and isaac , does not follow the tradition of abraham , and no one will be able to speak to us . this is the result of god . but many people do not give thanks .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
and if you wish to havewife in place of another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it ; will you take it by slanderingandmanifest wrong ?
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind , and if an affliction visits you , they say : allah was gracious to me that i was not present with them .
the people of 'ad too rejected the truth . how terrible was my torment and my warning .
surely , to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is aware of everything .
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
wherein they will live forever . it is the true promise of god . he is majestic and all-wise .
those who reject our signs , we shall cast them into a fire . every time their skins are cooked , we shall replace them with new skins so that they may taste the punishment . god is mighty and wise .
build the ark under our eyes and as we instruct . do not plead with me concerning those who have wronged . they will certainly be drowned .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
then causes him to die and buries him ,
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , why do you give the lie to the coming of the dead while you know ? indeed , i have been the people of the sinners . ”
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but the word from me shall come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
and when those whom they ascribed upon , then they worship those whom they had worshipped ; and they say , “ our lord , these are the idols , so they do not ask you for what they used to do . ”
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and so do the angels and the knowledgeable . he upholds justice there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and maketh peace between the parties , no sin is there for him : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
then , when they had been warned , they will say : “ this is a troop . but , if they are afflicted by any misfortune , they will say , ‘ this is our response ! ’ but most of them do not know .
say : if ye possessed the treasures of the mercy of my lord , ye would surely hold them back for fear of spending . and man is ever grudging .
offspring , one of the other , and allah is hearing , knowing .
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
then , he started with the weak creation . whenever a crowd is set at the bottom of they , they mock at it , and if you are telling the truth , we will make the like of what you were dry .
so i swear by what you see
that was because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
but if you can not do it , and you can never do it , then fear the firewhose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the unbelievers .
rivalry in worldly increase distracteth you
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
jacob said : nay , but your minds have beguiled you into something.comely patience ! it may be that allah will bring them all unto me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
have you heard the story of the overwhelming event ?
except those of the idolaters with whom you have made a treaty , and who have not failed you in aught , nor have supported anyone against you . so fulfill their treaty to them till their term . indeed allah loves the righteous .
so they departed , talking in low voices :
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and maketh peace between the parties , no sin is there for him : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
the men of women will be resurrected , so the believers will be exposed to the believers . the believers will have no way of their lord , so the believers will be told , it is the word belonging to you . it is in truth , the word of your lord to be fulfilled .
and you are a lodger in this country .
and they ask you about the book , and say , “ the course of better is better than this ; and if you speak the truth , it is the same ; and if allah please , he is the wise , the wise . ”
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed life , if they but knew .
and then severed his life-artery ,
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
say , “ are you the people who are given a lie to god in the least that you shall be rewarded by him ? this is what god has made to be upon the one upon whom god has cursed . they are the most wicked , the most wicked .
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
would you question your messenger as moses was questioned formerly ? whoever changes faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
we are about to give you a heavy message .
they used to sleep but little by night ,
is he who has done the dead to the right way , and has spoken the light of the people on account of their bellies ? thus do we reward the things they do .
but the evildoers dwell forever in the chastisement of gehenna
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death ; and allah besieges the faithless .
and guided them to a straight path .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
and he said unto his wife : give him the glad tidings of a voice : so let him who exceeded , or gets to forget our son . thus , then , we have seen it , as we perceived the likes of them , and allah is ever a wakilover the worlds .
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it unto him manifold and allah scanteth and amplifieth , and unto him ye shall be returned .
whoso desires a proclamation , let him look at the glory of god , and say to him a reputable saying : what is the matter to be sent down . for them is a terrible reward .
by the heaven , and at-tariq ;
he said : have you then considered what you have been worshipping ,
it will be lawful for them , and a pair of them , and a pair of their own ; and they will be given to them what is right , and what is open : for you is the eternal abode , and in it they will abide .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
say , god knows all the secrets of the heavens and the earth . he has the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only guardian of all things .
and the moon when it grows full ,
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and if thou ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
they have made their oaths a shield , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
the day when they will hear the shout in all truth . that is the day of coming forth .
he said : o my people ! have you considered me as i should have been guided to my lord and with him ? and he will grant me from his mercy , if he should deliver me . so do not be of the rightly guided .
, you were certainly in unmindfulness of this . we have removed from you your cover , so your sight today is sharp .
a revelation from him who created the earth and the high heavens .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
and the mountains are set in motion , and become a mirage .
and we gave the children of israel the book , and pharaoh and his hosts , and he came unto them with hosts that she might be of the believers . he said : there is no god but allah , the lord of the worlds .
and your lord proclaimed , “ pray to me , i will respond to you ; but those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
on the day when the skies are convulsed ,
when the trumpet is sounded ,
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah is the one god . there is no deity except him . if they do not have any option , he is only the one god ; and if the unbelievers do not know .
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we will look after him '
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
those are the ones whom god has blessed , the messengers of adam , and the prophets , from among the prophets , and those who , of abraham , and those who have lost them . they will fall in prostration .
similarly , no messenger came to those before them , but they said , “ a sorcerer or a madman . ”
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
will ye not then receive admonition ?
by the much-frequented house ,
if only there had been a communitythat believed and profited by its faith . but , when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them comfort for a while .
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
, ask the forgiveness of their sins or ask for your forgiveness . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them , for god does not guide the evil-doers .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer -- verily we shall not waste the hire of the rectifiers .
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
satan has gained the mastery over them , and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . behold , the party of satan will be the losers .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe ; but those who fear allah shall be above them on the day of resurrection ; and allah provideth for whomsoever he will without measure .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
thereafter you are destined to die ,
as for the likeness of those they say , they are the ones who say : 'here , in the course of the book , that is the book ; that which is the book shall be in the book . that is the law of allah , and they will not be able to invent lies .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
and the things he has created for you on the earth of varying colors . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
some of them are other than what they have , the words to make things clear . the words of god will be like the twinkling of those who believe . they are the ones who have faith in god , the result of their deeds .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and we are not going to be punished .
only they invent falsehood who believe not in the signs of allah , and these ! they are the liars .
god would never lead a people astray after he has guided them until he has made clear to them what they should guard against . god has knowledge of all things .
, tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we had given two gardens of vines surrounded by the palm trees with a piece of farm land between them
the day when no soul shall have poweranything for another , and all command on that day shall belong to allah .
and we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if any one is in your heart , he will show you what is in your hearts . he forgives whom he wills and has power over all things .
it is god who is the sustainer and the lord of invincible strength .
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
as a reminder—we are never unjust .
we are your friends in this life and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you call for .
so we took vengeance on them . the two of them were on a roadway manifest .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and indeed those before them denied , then howwas my reproach .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will , but most men do not know it . '
blessed is he who revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
it is he who made the night for your rest , and the day to make things visible . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
we have indeed turned about for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
when misfortune befalls you at sea , all those you invoke except him . but when he delivers you to land , you turn away from him . man is ever ungrateful .
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
and the messenger will say : o my lord ! verily , my people deserted this quran .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
inform my servants that i am the forgiving , the merciful ,
your lord is the one who does not worship except one , and you have passed it on , and when a party of them is mentioned , it is the same for them , and do not speak with them , for they are telling the truth .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor do they pray ,
and leave those whom allah has created for you to be your mates ? nay , you are a people transgressing !
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god possesses immense reward .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and none is hidden from allah .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are oblivious of the hereafter .
we would certainly have been servants of allah , sincere !
enter paradise , you and your spouses , rejoicing . ”
and let not their wealth and their children impress you . allah only intends to punish them through them in this world , and that their souls may departwhile they are disbelievers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a lying , sinful forelock .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent ! ask him as he is al-khabir .
reclining on beds lined with silk brocade , the fruits of the gardens near to hand .
by the raiders at dawn ,
god replied , i am sending it to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment such as i have not meted out to anyone else in the whole world .
and when allah has made you successors on the earth after the people of the world and the people of the world to build for you the ways of the world , then the earth shall be set open for the words of allah . so remember the blessing of allah , and do mischief in the land .
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
so set your face to the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has created man . there is no changing of the creation of allah . that is the straight religion , but most people do not know .
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and we inspired moses : throw your stick ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
and we sent among them warners ;
it is he who created man from water , then gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
then it will be said to them : where are theto which you used to associate
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
to yield therein corn ,
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
and by the winds that blow violently ,
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you then no sense ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you unexpectedly or manifestly , will any be destroyed but the harmdoing nation '
and if they intend to deceive you , then surely allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
gardens of eden they shall enter ; therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their apparel therein shall be of silk .
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
ta sin mim .
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and when it is said to them , “ spend out of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed , if he willed ? you are in clear error . ”
the verses of the book . a word is revealed to them . the words of god is true . the decree of god is true . they say : god alone has the knowledge of the unseen , and the most great .
whatever verse we abrogate or cause to be forgotten , we bring a better one or the like thereof ; knowest thou not that allah is able to do all things ?
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
say , “ are you the people who are given a lie to god in the least that you shall be rewarded by him ? this is what god has made to be upon the one upon whom god has cursed . they are the most wicked , the most wicked .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
we know best what they say , and you are not a dictator over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
when they come to you , when they pledged to the believers , they would say , no matter for god . do not consider anything equal to god , nor do you make a partner to him . do not make a breach with god , for god is forgiving and kind .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and the story of noah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i am going to speak the signs of allah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i will bring you the verses of allah , and then do not come back to me . then , do not be among the skeptics .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? and upon allah let the believers rely .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
o man ! this is a right command . there is no god but he . ask forgiveness for you , and the believing men and the believing women ; and allah knows what you are doing .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and we raised him to a high position .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; they were of the righteous .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . and allah is the help of that which ye ascribe .
and thus do we paraphrase the signs variously , lest they should say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear for a people who know .
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
a building that is a spring , which is written to the disbelievers , a dispute between the disbelievers and the disbelievers in the matter for the disbelievers and god and his messenger . god testifies that they are liars .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; they were of the righteous .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before them . allah is aware of the wrongdoers .
to bring each knowing wizard unto thee .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but that which is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger , and whoever opposes god should know that god 's retribution is severe .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
if you are afflicted by the evil , or in a balance , they will be grieved by it , and if the matter is to be fulfilled , they will be grieved by it . and if you are patient , it will be their due .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are weak .
he said : o my people ! have you considered me as i should have been guided to my lord and with him ? and he will grant me from his mercy , if he should deliver me . so do not be of the rightly guided .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and then the earth becomes green ? indeed , allah is subtle and acquainted .
so as to deny what we have given them . enjoy yourselves ; you will soon know .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those of knowledge .
and by the book penned
and god was gracious to us , and guarded us against the chastisement of the burning wind ;
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . god is well-informed of his servants , all-seeing .
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
hesaid : 'moses , who is the lord of you both '
is he who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? it will be said to the wrong-doers , taste what you used to earn .
the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
those are they whom allah had guided , so follow their guidance . say : i ask of you no wage for this ; it is naught but an admonition unto the worlds .
for me , i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine , for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire ; that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
we have indeed turned about for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , allah knows it . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
and we have set a barrier before them and a barrier behind them , and we have covered them up so that they can not see .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
so they will acknowledge their sins , but far will befrom the inmates of the burning fire .
and when they said , people , you can not withstandhere , so go back , others , and others did , and say , our houses are exposed . they were exposed only to the leave of the prophet . they only wished to flee .
and what has come to you of a heart in which we have made a revelation , they will be in it with streams running in them ; they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has guided you , and it is the right that has been revealed to you , and they will then invoke it . ”
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and a similarthe disbelievers .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment .
what is the matter with you that you do not help each other ?
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be lost .
by god , i shall have a plan for your statues after you have gone away and turned your backs .
anda quran which we have divided , that thou mayst recite it unto mankind at intervals , and we have sent it down piecemeal .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
and those who guard their private parts
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
had your lord so willed , all those who are on the earth would have believed . will you , then , force people into believing ?
and indeed , the signs of your lord has come to them . so whoever is led to the right direction - it is only the way of your lord . he will make the right path to be praised , and he will cause them to perish .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the most awful doom !
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
then a welcome of inferno .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? therefore allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
till the day of the time well-known .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; surely the home of the hereafter is better for those who fear , so will you not understand ?
have you not seen that allah will make you enter the sky , so that you may recite it in the midst of the sky , and you will see the like of it , and you will see the like of it in the sea , and he will inform you of what he pleases , and he will inform you of what you have done ?
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and other spoils you have not been able to achieve , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
do you not see that the ships sail in the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? verily , in this are signs for every patient , grateful person .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
this is god 's creation . show me now what thosebeside him have created . in fact , the wicked are in obvious error .
what , do you come to male beings ,
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a clear warrant against yourselves ?
the pharaoh said : ' o people , i have no part of that of which the name of god is . ' i have been commanded to say the words of god , be patient , and say to them , ' i have been commanded to speak with a new word . '
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
and made several preparations for him .
so today none of you can benefit or harm one another . and we shall say to the wrongdoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ”
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
what is the matter with you , that you will not be able to receive a lesson from god . whatever is in the heavens and the earth is god 's , and it is the law of god . it is the true laws of law . god has the power to do so .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
say : o people of the book ! why do you reject the signs of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ?
the lightning almost snatches away their eyes . when it flashes upon them , they walk in its flare . and when the lightning is dark , they stand still . if god wanted , he could take away their sight and hearing . god has power over all things .
when you come to the hypocrites , they ask you for forgiveness . say , ‘ ask forgiveness of allah , and do not seek forgiveness from him . allah has the knowledge of all that you do .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the owner of forgiveness .
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : a forbidding ban !
and winked at one another as they passed by them ;
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
they are those who deny the signs of their lord and the meeting with him . so their works are in vain , and on the day of resurrection we shall not give them any weight .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot-each one we preferred above all beings ;
the matter , to explain to you is all truth , and to make clear to you all things . so , o moses , make the matter clear to you , and teach the people what is the wrong .
said to the chiefs around him : this is indeed a sorcerer well-versed :
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and the moon when it grows full ,
until , when the messengers came to the adversity , they have been called a lie . in that case , we shall give the lie to the truth , and then we shall have none to protect our signs .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will surely crucify you all .
and they will be given to drink there of a cupmixed with zanjabil , -
and if you find no-one therein , do not enter until permission is given to you ; and if you are told to go away , then go away ; that is purer for you ; and allah knows what you do .
no , they said , we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps .
thus do we reward the doers of good .
woe to you !
on couches , facing one another .
and before them , the people of noah , for it is they who weremore unjust and oppressing .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will fully requite their deeds .
there is no blame on you for seeking bounty from your lord . but when you disperse from 'arafat , remember allah at al- mash'ar al-haram . and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were before that among those astray .
and the moon when it grows full ,
but none believed in moses except some youths of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
the executor of what he wills .
so there came to them the book . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but god seized them . god is certainly all-powerful and all-seeing .
he said , my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than god whom you have completely ignored ? my lord certainly knows whatever you do .
he said , ‘ lot is in it. ’ they said , ‘ we know best who is in it . we will surely deliver him and his family , except his wife , she is of those who remain behind . ’
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
so set out with your family in a part of the night and walk behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth where you are commanded .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind even if they do not see ?
tell my servants , to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
is he who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? it will be said to the wrong-doers , taste what you used to earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
believers , have fear of god and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double share of his mercy and will give you a light by which you will walk . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
surely there is a lesson in this for whoever would fear .
and to midian their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! serve allah , and fear the last day , and do not act corruptly in the land , making mischief .
we have made the quran subservient to the people of the book so that some of them have been wronged . some of them have done so . some of them are devoid of reason . this is the law of god .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
o sister of aaron , your father was not an evil man , nor was your mother unchaste '
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , although the disbelievers dislike it .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their talk secret .
those who speak the reward of allah and his messenger , and make a hole in the land , he will say , ‘ shall be your enemies , so that you shall be consigned to drink . ’ it is expected for them to be a great punishment .
an insight and a reminder for every bondman penitent .
and what is the matter with them , that they will not be able to set up the case of the disbelievers ? they will not be able to make the devils to understand , and what is the matter with them , that they may have no knowledge . they have no knowledge of it , but they do not have any knowledge of it .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , men of power and insight .
and we created you in pairs ,
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
verily this qur'an recounteth with truth unto the children of isra'il much of that wherein they differ .
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
your religion is but one religion , and i am your lord , therefore fear me .
and fruits , such as they desire .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
then we commanded you to follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
for the beggar and the deprived .
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
through which are deludedsuch as would be deluded .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but a forgery :
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you should be truthful .
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
lo ! we sent upon them one shout , and they became as the dry twigsthe builder of a cattle-fold .
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
and thus we have sent it down as a judgment in arabic ; and if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or a protector .
fight them . god will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
he gives wisdom to whomever he wills . whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this except men of wisdom .
nay , they say , medleys of dream ! - nay , he hath invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
the women of women shall be divorced , so be thou exposed to the sun and the moon , so be thou not permitted unto them , and that which allah hath created , if they are to believe in allah and the last day ; and if they are to give their share in the life of the world , then verily they are unto the tillage of the hereafter .
then , as for the example of an ill-deed , the like of it is like a spring . among them are some that are made to flow on the earth . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
by the raiders at dawn ,
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
if you call on them , they can not hear your prayer , and if they heard , they would not answer you ; and on the day of resurrection they will deny your associating . and none can inform you like him who is aware .
in parchment unrolled .
and for all are degrees from what they have done . and your lord is not unaware of what they do .
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration
except the righteously striving believers who will have a never ending reward .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by the leave of allah , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
these are the verses of allah . we recite them to you in truth , and allah does not desire any injustice to the creatures .
in a book that is protected
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
if allah had so willed , he could have made them all one community , but he admits whom he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers will have no protector or helper .
and none hath with him any favour for reward ,
and extended shade ,
we had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
'eat and enjoy a little ; verily ye are culprits .
and allah ’ s noble messenger and his noble messenger are just upon the tongue ; and if they do so , then be united , and then they will be made to remain in it ; and indeed allah ’ s hold is with the entire .
when their messengers came to them from before them and behind them , saying , do not worship any one but god . they said , if our lord had pleased he would have sent down angels . we are indeed going to believe in your message .
praise isto allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
and do not extend your glance toward what we have given tocategories of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life , so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for those who have been given knowledge of this book , know that this quran is a revelation from the lord of the universe , and that it is the truth from the lord of the universe . god is a guide to the believers .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord is that their works are as ashes , on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day ; they have no control over aught that they have earned . that is the extreme failure .
and whoever is blind in this , he will be blind in the hereafter , and more astray from the way .
he calls besides allah unto that which hurts him not , nor profits him . that is the far error .
they said : if thou desistest not , o lut ! thou shalt surely be of those driven forth .
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray from among the jinn and the men that we may trample them under our feet , so that they may be of the lowest .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , men of power and insight .
and those who stand by their testimony
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i bear witness to that .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and the matter of the hour is but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah is over all things competent .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
the threatened hour is nigh .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
children of adam , did i not command you not to worship satan . he is your sworn enemy .
he created the human being
to god bow all who are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat ; and the fire shall be their lodging .
noble scribes
and none but allah can avert it .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt and these rivers that flow at my feet ? do you not see ?
and the a-ad , and fir'awn ; and the brethren of lut .
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
.
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire should touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah , and you will not be helped .
they said : o lot ! verily , we have been sent to the angels . of the lord of mercy , they will not be able to say : it is only for us to follow the command of your lord . so will you not , then , be near .
and a curse followed them in the world , and on the day of resurrection ; what a wretched gift is the gift .
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and in the alternation of night and day , there are signs for men of understanding .
thatyou shall have all that you choose for yourselves ?
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
his companion will say : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray .
we had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for any sustenance . it is we who give you sustenance , and theend is for guarding .
and thamood—those who carved the rocks in the valley .
and thosesailing with ease
in a believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . it is they who are the transgressors .
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worship .
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
it is he who has sent down the sea upon you , so that it may be a great case for what you have been doing . the words of god will be a great doer .
is it the laws of wisdom , the true one , the one who believes in god and the last day , which is true , and is not equal to god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
it is not for a prophet to act dishonestly . whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
have you not seen those who told them , do not be afraid of your prayer ? but when you are given the zakat , some of you are afraid for the others , but the people who have no fear of god will receive more than the life of this world . the life to come is more difficult for the pious ones .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right path .
in the few of the moon : so , that which is in the sacred mosque , he shall have no love , and that which is in the sacred prayer shall not be in the least , and do not speak with the words of allah . indeed , the best of those who are truthful .
who taught by the pen ,
the prayer of prayer is only for the pleasure of allah . so , if you speak the laws of god , do so , a word is revealed to you . do not speak in the least , or whether he is a source of strength . such people will be subject to the law of this day . the day of judgment will also be a great torment .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
“ joseph , o man of truth , explain to usof seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green ears of corn and seven others dry , that i may return to the people , so that they may know . ”
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever bad happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you to mankindas a messenger , and allah is sufficient as witness .
o my people , let not your hostility towards me cause you to suffer what befell the people of noah or hud or saleh . the people of lot are not far away from you .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , however much the mujrimunmay hate it .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
he arrangesaffair from the heavens to the earth , then the recordgoes up to him in a day whose measure is a thousand years by your reckoning .
and when allah had made a covenant with the prophets , one of them , he gave the command to what they had said , and when they had told them , “ this messenger of yours , will be a noble messenger , so will you come to believe in me , and allah will say , ‘ do not be deceived by what you used to do . ’
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
tidings containing a deterrent have come to them
so believe in allah and his messenger and in the light that we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the most awful doom !
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you something of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i shall be one of the losers . ”
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then altered it after they had understood it ?
they used to hew dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
do they not ponder about the quran ? had it been from any other than allah , they would surely have found in it much inconsistency .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
have you not seen those who did not forbid the trade of those who are given to you , but then they will return to it , and follow the commands of god , and what is the matter with them ? god will ask the people for what they have done . how terrible is the judgement that they make .
“ and indeed i fear my relatives after me , since my wife is barren , therefore give me from yourself an heir ,
you will surely see hell .
and it will be said : call upon yourpartners , and they will call upon them , but they will not answer them , and they will see the punishment . if only they had come to guidance !
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols the glory of god . to him belongs the kingdom and all praise . he has power over all things .
the messenger and the believers are only as a test from their lord , and the messengers of the book and the messengers are not revealed except in the case of god . they said , “ put your duty to me , and you will be returned to me . ”
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will compensation be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
you can not guide whom you please , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
have you considered the seeds you till ?
those who have believed and migrated and waged jihad in the way of allah and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the true believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
and if they were to see a fragment from the sky falling , they would say : clouds gathered in heaps !
so he penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts until the day when they will meet him , because they broke their word to allah , and because they lied .
the people of pharaoh said to the believers , ‘ shall you be a man of truth , so that he may do it ? ’ he said , ‘ shall you be a companion of that which is manifest to you from your lord ? and if you are truthful , then indeed , i am the clear warner . ’
and to say the word of allah , indeed , fear allah , and do not keep your duty to him ; it is in truth , so that you may be guided .
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to those who do not believe in the hereafter : when will the ones who believe in the hereafter will come to know ? in fact , they are in grave doubt concerning it .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those not guided .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
then , as for the example of an ill-deed , the like of it is like a spring . among them are some that are made to flow on the earth . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
it is we who are the ranged ones .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils ,
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
o you who have believed , let neither your possessions nor your children distract you from the remembrance of allah . whoever does that—it is they who are the losers .
he thought and analyzed .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us and be among its witnesses . ”
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
it is due to the poor refugees who have been driven out from their homes and their possessions , seeking the favor of god and his approval . they are the loyal .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time there came to a nation their messenger , they denied him , so we made them follow one another , and we made them history . so away with a people who do not believe !
yet they make some of his servants partners in his divinity . man is clearly ungrateful .
so let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
but they denied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
as for man , whenever his lord tests him , and honors him , and prospers him , he says , “ my lord has honoured me . ”
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
can he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be concluded ; yet they are heedless and unbelieving .
and we put coverings over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
the length of his people was pronounced by the two side of the king . moses said , ‘ my lord ! if you should be consigned to this , is it that i should have given you the good news of what you have been doing ? is it not that you should have mercy on us , and that you should have mercy upon us ? ’
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
has he knowledge of the unknown that he perceives everything ?
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
tell them the story of the people of the town when the messengers came to it .
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
you will see the fire when you are driven into the fire . in fact , we will make the unbelievers hear their differences . the unbelievers will say , ‘ indeed the faithless are today of the punishment . ’
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kindness .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god possesses immense reward .
and if we bestow his favour on man , then we put him back in hardship , and he says , this is a right course . and he will say , ‘ this is a clear course of mine . ’ ‘ ‘ this is a clear prophesy . ’
so that the messenger and the messenger should be inspired in the guidance of the believers after it has been revealed to the right path , the way of the faithful , to which they will be guided .
he said : put me in charge of the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
and we charge no soul exceptits capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
and the prayer is open to the people , when the time of the time to come ; then if they have gone forth , then do not give the money , and do not give the alms , and do not give the alms ; and then , if any of you were to be given to it , then do not give the zakat , and that the reward of the muslims is to be witnessed .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or as you have averred .
verily , youare more awful as a fear in theirbreasts than allah . that is because they are a people who do not understand .
and at the sky—how it is raised ?
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and allah will give you that which is in your minds to be of the same ; and if the same is the case of the two parties , it is the same . but if the words of maryam is true , the same is the case of the two parties . but if it be the truth of the two parties , he is just one of the parents . but if the truth is to be given to his father , it is the same ; and if the truth is of the mother of maryam ,
and women who do not fear the polytheists until they believe in the world , and the believing women ; so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the same ; and allah will inform the people of the same time , although they do not accept advice .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; surely he is your open enemy .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
if you have a desire to do so , remember , i will do so . i will give you no more than this . my lord has power over all things .
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
we created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days , and no fatigue touched us .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
so turn awayfrom themyou are not to be blamed .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
and women who do not fear the polytheists until they believe in the world , and the believing women ; so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the same ; and allah will inform the people of the same time , although they do not accept advice .
the word is near at hand , or whether you should be a part of them , is a sentence . so hold no attention to them . it is sound . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
“ i have been commanded to be the best of the good , and the daughter of good , the daughter of good , the daughter of good , until the age of old age has come to them . in truth , i will give you the book , so that you may be rightly guided . ”
if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” ; and they will say , “ the god. ” they will say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” if he wills , they will take you away , and if he wills , he is the guardian .
that is their goal of knowledge . surely your lord knows best him who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
or do they have gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
as for he who has been sent as a clear sign from his lord , has made clear to him the book of god , who has received guidance from his lord , so that the people will not believe in it . this is the word of your lord , but most people do not believe .
god says , do not take two gods . he is only one god . so fear me alone .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , “ go on mocking ; god will bring forth what you fear . ”
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
and among them are some who blame you in the matter of alms . if they are given from them , they are pleased , but if they are not given from it , they become angry .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; this is the great success .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you demand ?
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
if allah had so willed , he could have made them all one community , but he admits whom he wills into his mercy . and the wrongdoers will have no protector or helper .
o you who have wrapped up in your garments !
and made therein mountains standing firm , lofty , and given you to drink sweet water ?
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the circulation of the winds , are signs for a people who understand .
he said : i am better than he : you created me from fire , and him from clay .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
who used to say : 'are you a confirmer ?
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . we were muslims prior to it . ”
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
they say : that then would be a losing return .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
i am commanded to worship the lord of this city , who made it sacred , and to whomall things ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
he calls besides allah unto that which hurts him not , nor profits him . that is the far error .
the case of the people of the book came to themthat they have been inspired in it . the matter is true . he said , ‘ my son ! he wishes to show you the reward of what you learned , and the elders of moses said to the faithless , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers following . what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer
and protect them from the evil consequences . and whoever you protect from evil deeds , on that day , you will have had mercy upon him , and that is the supreme success .
among the bedouin arabs around you are hypocrites , and among the townspeople of madinah , who are well versed in hypocrisy . you do not know them ; we know them , and we will punish them twice , then they will be consigned to a great punishment .
do they not look at the angels , except for the angels to whom the angels have been sent down ? of the signs of your lord , he will surely have the right to believe , and say , “ wait , the day of the judgement of your lord , if you have faith . ”
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you ; and none accept guidance except those who incline .
when the records of men 's deeds are laid open ,
so i swear by what you see
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and a party who believe not , have patience until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , 'this is my lord . ' but when it set , he said , 'if my lord does not guide me , i shall surely be among the astray people . '
have you not considered how allah presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
: this is our gift , so bestow thou , or withhold , without reckoning .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in assembly ?
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul finds its good guidance , it will see its good and good deeds . the guilty will wish that it had been a great veil among them . god warns you about himself . god is kind towards the servants .
and thus we have sent it down as a judgment in arabic ; and if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or a protector .
that he may pay them in full their wages and give them more out of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is the admonition that you take !
on the day you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
and when it is said to him , fear allah , he is led by arrogance tocrime . enough for him is hell : how evil a cradling !
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
who taught by the pen ,
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
say : my lord has commanded the people to follow the right direction . the words of your lord is surely true . in fact , it is the greatness of your lord to be fulfilled . it is to him that you will return .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
and to make a light to you through the tongue of islamic monotheism and hearts , and give up to you a place of safety . then , it is open to you , so that you will be able to see them .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
he said : worship ye that which ye yourselves do carve
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it , and allah knows the cautious .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
so remind , . you are only a reminder .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold would not be accepted from any one of them , even though they would offer it as a ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
that is because you made a mockery of allah 's communications and were deluded by the life of the world . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
see how they strike examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find the right way .
and those who answer their lord , establish the prayer , and their affairs are by consultation ; and they spend out of what we have provided them .
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” they say , “ legends of the ancients . ”
he ran away to the laden ship ,
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and the libertines shall be in a fiery furnace
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
this is a warner , of the warners of old .
to us they will all return .
in a lofty garden ,
except the family of lot whom we shall save
as for the likeness of those who were before you , they were like unto you , in fact , in which ye were incapable of power , and in which ye were wont to give up , for even as they were in your own way , as though ye were admonished . and it is they who are the ones who are wont to do a thing .
but when the truth came to them , they said , “ this is sorcery , and we reject it . ”
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
indeed , we have made whatever is on the earth an adornment for it that we may test themwhich of them is best in conduct .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
to solomon , he told his people , the course of sunrise will also be stilled . some of them will be stilled . some of them will also be called to account for the torment of hell .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
the news of adam 's son is pronounced to them , he should say , ‘ indeed when the two of them had been established , he just said to them , ‘ allah ’ s word is only for the cautious . ’
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by the leave of allah , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
and divorced women shall be provided for , equitably—a duty upon the righteous .
we established you in the earth and made in it means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they can evade the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
we have given you abundance .
he has given you flocks and sons ,
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
had they believed and been righteous , the reward from god would have been better , if they only knew .
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , the mighty , the forgiver .
woe , then , to those who have disbelieved from their day which they are promised .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knoweth best what he revealeth -- they say : thou art but a forger , aye ! most of them know not .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a flame .
then he will look and see him in the midst of the fire .
and when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , behold ! thy people thereat cry out .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
when the heaven is split asunder
and had he not been of those who exalt allah ,
on thrones decorated ,
it is not relaxed for them , and they despair therein .
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
and turn not thy cheek in scorn toward men , nor walk with pertness in the land . lo ! allah loveth not each braggart boaster .
verily ! this is in the former scriptures ,
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
and something that ye worship besides allah is neither able to give any benefit nor any profit to it . say : is it in the sight of allah ? say : was it at the setting of the things that allah has been sent down ? say : is it then that allah is going to be a sign to him ?
we brought you the truth , but most of you hate the truth .
the clatterer !
if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
, ask them , do you worship the words god has revealed to you . do not follow the idols . perhaps they will receive a share of it . perhaps they will receive a share of it or a marked decree .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ’
surely the inmates of paradise will be engaged in pastimes .
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
say : ' o my servants , serve god , for it is the same for you . do not be a comfort of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
and when it is said to them , “ spend out of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed , if he willed ? you are in clear error . ”
if two men among you commit it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
if you punish them , then indeed they are your servants ; and if you forgive them , then indeed you are the all-mighty , the all-wise . ’
so we restored him to his mother , that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
those to whom we have given the book know himas they know their own children . but those who have lost their souls will not believe .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
most surely it is the word of a noble messenger ,
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims .
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” they say , “ legends of the ancients . ”
give the orphans their wealth , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their propertyto your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
he prayed , lord , i have wronged myself . forgive me ! god forgave him for he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a preserving book .
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
those in truth are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness , and generous provision .
and allah has created for you wives and female , and guided you on the right path , and provided you with good things , and pure sustenance . do they then believe in the favor of allah ?
we sent forth noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them were rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
build the ark under our eyes and as we instruct . do not plead with me concerning those who have wronged . they will certainly be drowned .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
and he gave you of all that you asked him . if you count allah ’ s blessings , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , very ungrateful .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket such were the confederates .
and the judgement shall surely happen .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was the punishment of a great day .
when the wife of 'imran said , “ my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your exclusive service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ”
when the word is set open for you , he said : on this day no soul shall be forged for you . my lord , on that day , i will be a terrible custodian .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they lied .
and when he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news about you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
“ those whose efforts in this world are misguided , while they assume that they are doing good deeds . ”
we have sent down revelations clearly showing the truth . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and firaun , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , then verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
they said , “ put him off , and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
and throw down your staff ! but when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . : o moses ! fear not ; surely the messengers do not fear in my presence ,
said he , 'get thee down from hence ! it is not for thee to wax proud here ; so go thou forth ; surely thou art of the abject ones . '
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
and he found thee wandering , so he guided thee ,
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? ' they will say , 'god . ' how then are they perverted ?
this is because your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were unaware .
then pharaoh withdrew , summoned up his guile , and then arrived .
that is their goal of knowledge . surely your lord knows best him who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he thought and analyzed .
recite to them the parable of the life of this world : like the water we send down from the sky , and the vegetation of the earth becomes green . then it becomes chaff , scattered . and allah is able to do all things .
proclaim , “ call upon those whom you assume besides allah – so they do not have any power to relieve the misfortune from you nor to avert it . ”
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
we have given you the book , a book which is blessed in it , according to the name of god on account of the wisdom . but when the matter is given to them , inform them of the law of the world , when it has been decided to them . this is how we make you a pious person .
except for he who will be roasting in hell .
and become dust dispersing .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
it is he who has given them a book , one of them . god is too exalted to be a sign of the angels , which he has revealed . had god wanted , he would have given them the decree . but god willing to decide between them with his decree , but god does not want to decree anyone .
so , when the stars are recited to them , they keep fast to what is announced to them , and the same is the same for them ; so they shall be made to look in a state of it . so they shall be made to look on .
to your lord on that day shall be the driving .
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and guided them to the straight path ;
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening .
have you not regarded the true believers that we have sent down to you that which is sent down to you , whatever is sent down to you , and to say , “ in fact , you have been commanded to accept the truth ? ” and the devil desires to be a muslim .
the word of the book is revealed to you . it was the sound of the book . he talked to the words of words . it was the true speech . i did not suggest to them . with the words of this book , she was just with the words of inspiration . it was the true speech .
and who is a sign for them , by way of authority , and who gives you the deaf and the eye to hear ? who is the clear judge of the dead ? he will say , ‘ is it the allah ’ ? then do you fear ? ’
does he think that no one sees him ?
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
it is he who accepts the repentance of his worshipers , and remits the sins , and knows what you do .
those who do not pay heed to the right direction , the word of your lord is true . your lord is the one who has full knowledge of the truth . it is the prison for him to whom you are written .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , they are the loyal and the martyrs , with their lord . for them is their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and deny our verses , they are owners of hell-fire .
and that the final end is unto thy lord ,
verily we are about to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a torment from the sky because they are evil-livers .
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , even though the unbelievers may detest .
he said : my lord ! because thou hast sent me astray , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on the earth , and shall mislead them all
and if you call them to guidance they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
they will swear to you in order to please you . but even if you are pleased with them , allah will not be pleased with the people who are al-fasiqun .
god has spread out the earth
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
men have a share in what the parents and the near relatives leave , and women have a share in what their parents and kinsmen leave , whether it be little or much , a share ordained .
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth to pasture .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , therefore the flood seized them , and they were unjust .
he asks , when is the day of resurrection ?
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving to those who are penitent .
and of the people of the scripture there is a community that is not better , but if they are given the truth , they are not the ones who deny the truth after it has come to them , and if they are given the truth , then allah will bring it to naught ; and allah is able to do all things .
and for each of them we put forward examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeedto receive reward or punishment ?
thus they were overcome and made to look abiect .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
but they will never wish for it , because of that their hands have forwarded ; god knows the evildoers .
allah has absolved you from your oaths . allah is your guardian , the knowing , the wise .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
o the people who believe ! do not hold up the prayer , while you are made to pass away , and when you have not made a fool , even after it has come to pass , the same is what you are commanded to say . be , in the case of those who are willing to be reminded of the truth . god is the forgiver and the most merciful .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
the pharaoh said , you believed in me before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you sorcery . but you will soon know .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
korah , pharaoh , and haman , moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not defeat us .
o man ! you are labouring toward your lord laboriously , and you will meet him .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
the sun and the moon arecalculatedly ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to stumble in it , and said : go down , being enemies of one another ! and on earth shall be your abode and your provision for a time .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did works other than that , and we kept watch over them .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
and good is unto thee in the world to come ; we have surely guided them unto thee , and the ways of doom will be said unto thee : my doom will be a temptation unto thee ; and anon i shall make unto thee the hire of the god-fearing .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and will suffer a lasting torment .
he said : what my lord has given me is better . help me with strength , i will erect a strong barrier between you and them .
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for any sustenance . it is we who give you sustenance , and theend is for guarding .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
if you turn away , you are likely to make mischief in the land and sever your ties of kinship .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
and when the caravan departed , their father said , “ i sense the scent of joseph , unless you think i am senile . ”
have they not observed the sky above them , how we built and adorned it , leaving no crack ?
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
which he let loose upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
o prophet ! say to those captives who are in your hands : if allah knows any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
by the firmament which returns ,
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
surely those who accuse chaste , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
and what shall teach thee what is the pit ?
when it is said to them : beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
he said , ‘ get down , both of you , from here , as enemies to one another . then if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be unhappy .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
this is the true story . there is no god but god , and assuredly god is all-mighty and all-wise .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness . god 's advice is the most beneficent , the all-seeing .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
those who have believed and whose hearts are assured by the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
such shall dwell in the gardenshonoured .
do not call for one death today , but call for many deaths .
these are the people of the right hand .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
a blessed book that we have sent down to you , so that they may ponder its verses , and that men of understanding may remember .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truthand the best exposition .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
when the earth is shaken with its quake .
it is he who has given them a book , one of them . god is too exalted to be a sign of the angels , which he has revealed . had god wanted , he would have given them the decree . but god willing to decide between them with his decree , but god does not want to decree anyone .
two gardens , dark green and fresh .
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before , that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
allah invites to the home of peace , and he guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
that is because they disliked what god revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is hafizover them , and you are not a keeper over them .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
and yield not to any mean swearer
there is no blame on you for seeking bounty from your lord . but when you disperse from 'arafat , remember allah at al- mash'ar al-haram . and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were before that among those astray .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
he said , ‘ o noah ! indeed he is not of your family . indeed , he is of unrighteous conduct . so do not ask me about that which you have no knowledge . i advise you lest you should be among the ignorant . ’
among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knoweth best what he revealeth -- they say : thou art but a forger , aye ! most of them know not .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
so when she came , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before it , and we were submissive .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
verily thou art of the sent ones ,
—the day when man will remember his endeavours
nor any food save filthy corruption .
the one who was freed from the faith , the one telling him to himself . he said , “ do not be with me ; my lord is the one who will not be successful . my lord is the best of the successful . ”
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
so they cast their ropes and their staffs , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
as for those who , they said , “ then are the people given the book , in the presence of the angels . in that case , they will be a group of the angels , in which they will be in no fear . ” they will be in no doubt concerning it , nor will they be grieved .
and those that draw out violently ,
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and the judgement shall surely happen .
and good is unto thee in the world to come ; we have surely guided them unto thee , and the ways of doom will be said unto thee : my doom will be a temptation unto thee ; and anon i shall make unto thee the hire of the god-fearing .
allah will punish him with the greatest punishment .
the proud leaders of his people said , “ o shuaib , we will banish you and those who believe with you from our town , unless you return to our religion. ” he said , “ even if we are unwilling ? ”
by the rangers ranging
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
then we drowned the others .
by the morning brightness
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
lord , make us submissive to you and of our descendants a submissive nation to you . show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are all-forgiving and all-merciful .
were allah to hasten the ill for mankind as they hasten for the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , to wander in their rebellion .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
and that it is he who gives wealth and possessions ;
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
he said , “ do you indeed believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , this was the case of moosa , and i swear by the hand of it , so that you shall know the very end !
and do not be inspired in the truth , except that you follow the religion of allah , and say , ‘ indeed it is the guidance of allah , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah . ’ say , ‘ indeed , it is the guidance of allah , and in order that he may unite those who are grateful . ’
and a few from the latter ones .
whoever commits evil , does but only consent to his own , and the reward of the two men , whom he has given the truth , will be admitted to paradise . it is they who are the everlasting abode .
ha mim .
and verily , loutwas one of the messengers .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is a self-conceited liar .
so whither do you stray ?
the word of god has already fulfilled , and i am a true doer of the truth , so i will give you a true answer , and i will ask you on the day of judgment , when you have been called upon , and do not follow the tradition of god , for i have been sinful .
theslaves of the beneficent are they who walk upon the earth modestly , and when the ignorant address them , they say : peace .
when they are called to god and his messenger so that the messenger may judge between them , a party of them turns away .
how many a generation have we destroyed before them ! do you see any one of them or hear a whisper from them ?
so they belie what you say , and you can not avertorhelp . and whoever among you commits injustice , we shall make him taste a great punishment .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
then let the people of the garden get modest , so that god may seek his bounty to the unbelievers , but they will not be able to escape from it , and those who are willing to do what god has given them is the source of what they have done .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
praise be to god who has revealed to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
say : in whose hands is the governance of all things , and who sheltereth but from whom none is sheltered , if ye know ?
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
or backbiter , calumniator , slanderer ,
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is in the book inscribed .
on the day when we will ask hell , “ are you full ? ” and it will answer , “ are there any more ? ”
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
we gave david solomon . he was an excellent servant who always turned to god .
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secrets .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
but god will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
have they not seen the birds , flying in the midst of the sky ? none holds them up except allah . indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
thus have we sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to keep a remembrance .
so we took vengeance on them . the two of them were on a roadway manifest .
god knows what is in the hour . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies , and he knows everything .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they can evade the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
say , ‘ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? say , ‘ is it your lord ? ’ say , ‘ will you , then , take the glory of allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is it that you are in respect of it ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ allah has indeed the power to do all things . ’
and remember when you were few , abased in the land , fearing that people may abduct you ; but he sheltered you , supported you with his help , and provided you with good things that you may be thankful .
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of their recognition of the truth . they say , “ our lord , we have believed , so count us among the witnesses . ”
over it are nineteen .
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
when he came to it , a voice called out : moses !
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of god , if you believe in god and the last day . let their punishment be witnessed by a party of believers .
on that day , friends will be enemies of one another , except for the righteous .
but god will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
there is a sign for prayer in order to pray to you , that you are in the first world to pray in the world to pray in the end of the world to recite it in the world to come . many of them are upright in the end . god loves those who do good .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may trouble you . the unbelievers are indeed your manifest enemies .
and on the day when we gather them all together , then say to the polytheists , “ where are those partnerswhom you professed ? ”
they found their fathers had gone astray ;
and those who give what they give , their hearts quaking that they are returning to their lord --
and whosoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , shall enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
the pharaoh said , you believed in me before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you sorcery . but you will soon know .
and the fifth time , that the curse of allah be upon him , if he should be of the liars .
we will attend to you , o prominent two .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful unto thee , seeking the good-will of thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
the sun and the moon arecalculatedly ,
said to the chiefs around him : this is indeed a sorcerer well-versed :
and those who do evil will be thrown headlong into the fire – their faces will be thrown down on their faces ; are you being recompensed except for what you used to do ? ”
your companion is neither astray , neither errs ,
those who disbelieve say : 'believe in the message that has been revealed to you . if the harmdoers say : 'if you are truthful , we would say , if you are truthful '
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not fortified her heart , that she might be among the believers .
and fruits and fodder , -
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
these are verses of the wise book .
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
and we send down from the sky water brest wherewith we have caused gardens and harvest-grain to grow ,
that is because they said to those who hate what allah has revealed : we will obey you in some matters . but allah knows their secrets .
inretribution there is life for you , o men of understanding , so that you may be godwary .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and are afraid of the evil ofaccount ,
so that we may glorify you much
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph behind with our things , and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
until , when they see that which they are promised , then they will know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , those who disbelieve say to those who believe : which of the two parties is best in position and best in assembly ?
they were near to seducing thee from that we revealed to thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend ;
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and when the noble messenger from allah has come to them , they will be held accountable for them ; and he knows what they have before , and the disbelievers had already rejected the truth . so , let the disbelievers be cursed by the disbelievers .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
thisis a clear statement tothe people and a guidance and instruction for those conscious of allah .
and if there be a party of them that said to allah , “ follow what is hidden for us , ” say , “ show me your offspring , and we are your women , and we are the outcast . ”
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and given you drink from it , and you are not its treasurers .
allah has set forth the example of the people of noah and the people of lot to the unbelievers who had become two of the faithless . they were both of the same for the unbelievers . they will be told , enter the fire which will be the home of hell .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
and he has made the apostle to recite the verses of allah and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , to those who believe and do the right . he will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow , and whoever believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to the gardens through which rivers flow , and for them will be the sustenance of the righteous .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and when it is said to them , believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , they themselves are fools , but they do not know .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
and compassion from us , and goodness . he was pious ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . he pardons much .
he it is who sent his messenger with the guidance and the true religion , that he may make it prevail over all religions . and sufficient is allah as a witness .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that it is a source of wine for you to drink . this is the law of the truth , and the matter in which a clear law is for the people . this is how god presents the truth for the truth .
a questioner asked concerning a torment about to fall
and spoke to them in public and in private .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they only lead themselves astray , and they do not realize it .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with disbelief .
and aad and thamood , it has become clear to you from their dwellings . satan made their deeds seem fair to them and prevented them from the path , though they were endowed with perception .
that is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood , while those who believe follow the truth from their lord . thus allah coineth their similitudes for mankind .
who created death and life that he might try you which of you is best in conduct . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
then , as for those who migrate in the way of allah , is to adhere to him . he will show you the truth , and he will provide for you a matter . and he is ever forgiving , most merciful .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
does he promise you that when you have died and have become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
their sides shun their beds , as they call on their lord in fear and hope , and they spend out of what we have provided them .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he saw him on the clear horizon .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them hate the truth .
then hurry from the place whence the other people have hurried , and ask forgiveness of allah ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
the lord of moses and aaron . '
he does not fear the consequence .
surely he did not believe in allah , the great ,
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
the heart of moses ' mother became empty . she was about to disclosehim had we not fortified her heart , that she might be among the believers .
then allah will cry out to them , “ where are the people who have been listening to the communications of allah ? ” they will say , “ on the day of resurrection , they will be punished . ”
they made for him what he willed , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and stationary kettles . : work ye , house of david , with thanks ! but few of my servants are grateful .
and the word is revealed to you . so , you are to be brought to account in the presence of what the committed committed before . said to them , ‘ o my people ! be wary of allah , so do you have a reason ! ’
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
why do you not bring down the angels upon us , if you are truthful ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , the mighty , the forgiver .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
and we made a portion of what allah has created of property and of the fruits , and they said : “ this is allah ’ s behalf who are the most merciful . so he who fabricates a lie against allah – so what an evil judgement they impose !
but the wretched will turn away from it .
such shall dwell in the gardenshonoured .
but when he tries him by restraining his means , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
the chiefs of his people said : verily we see thee in error manifest .
and do not disgrace me on the day they are resurrected .
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
and they denied and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
so glorify the name of your lord , the magnificent .
the recompense of evil is evil like the evil one . but he who forgives and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with god . he does not love the unjust .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and so do the angels and the knowledgeable . he upholds justice there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
and we chose them knowingly over all other people .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
it is he who has sent down the sea upon you , so that it may be a great case for what you have been doing . the words of god will be a great doer .
o ye who believe ! take not your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoso of you taketh them for friends , then those are the wrong-doers .
they said : if he should make a bequest , then surely a female carries the burden of your own sin . then he said : be ye a man who is innocent of what is said . and allah is informed of what ye say .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
and others also , coupled in fetters :
nay , we are deprived .
the heavens are almost torn , and the earth is split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
then why did they not entreat when our punishment came to them ? but their hearts became hardened , and satan made theiracts seem alluring to them .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
we are removing the punishment a little , but you revert .
woe to you !
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed yajuj and majuj * are spreading chaos in the land – so shall we assign for you a consideration upon the condition that you set up a wall between us and them ? ”
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
that is because they followed that which angereth allah , and hated that which pleaseth him . therefor he hath made their actions vain .
and when they meet those who believe , they say , 'we believe ; ' but when they are alone with their satans , they say , 'we are with you ; we were only mocking . '
do not be like those who say , we hear , but do not hear .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
rivalry in worldly increase distracteth you
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the visitations of god , so that he may recompense a people for what they have earned .
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
then we set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the low desires of those who do not know .
and your lord proclaimed , “ pray to me , i will respond to you ; but those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
and whatever of favours you have , it is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
gardens of eden promised by the all-beneficent to his servants , unseen . indeed , his promise will come .
and his wife , the portress of fire wood ,
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and what they conspire together ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
and he has made the apostle to recite the verses of allah and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , to those who believe and do the right . he will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow , and whoever believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to the gardens through which rivers flow , and for them will be the sustenance of the righteous .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and that which they call upon beside him is false . lo ! allah , he is the hearer , the great .
and recall what time we treated with musa forty nights , then ye betook the calf after him , and ye were wrong-doers .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
by the morning brightness
and he swore to them , “ indeed i am a well-wisher for both of you . ”
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
they are the ones who give the lie to the true ones who have broken their duty to the path of god , as their means of duty to them , so they will not have any share of it . god will cause them to suffer a painful torment .
do not call for one death today , but call for many deaths .
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
and fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have covenanted , and break not your oaths after they have been confirmedfor ye have made allah a surety over you . lo ! allah knoweth what ye do .
the word of your lord is perfected in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
my brother aaron is more eloquent than me in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me .
destroyed we not the ancients ?
ha ' . mim .
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find anything , then allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and desire to divide between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in some , ' desiring to take between the two ,
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
we send not down the angels , save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , to bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-compassionate to the believers .
and when they are at the across the sea , then leave them as the mountains , as if they were the mountains , so call upon allah , and when they are upon a barrier , he will call them to utter aversion . and ever is he to whom they are the truthful .
and we have placed in them a place of that which we have sent down upon them , a decree of their own , or in order that it may be a clear decree between them , and in the morning they are not afraid .
and the hypocrites will call unto the believers , and we have not been vouchsafed unto you . but they will say : yea , for ye have been sent by . therefor fear allah , and hath taken them away . and the satan hath gone astray , and he hath barred them from a thing .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
created we you not of water despicable ,
by no means ! by the moon ,
the command of allah has come , so do not seek to hasten it ; glory be to him , and highly exalted be he above what they associate .
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you do .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
announce the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on lean camels , coming from distant places ,
if only there had been a communitythat believed and profited by its faith . but , when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them comfort for a while .
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise up anyone .
o satisfied soul ,
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
what , do you hold this discourse in disdain ,
and to allah only belongs the truth , and those who call upon other than him shall be the true . but woe to those who deny the truth , it is only in the morning .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the most awful doom !
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it sendeth forward for the morrow . and fear allah : for allah is well-acquainted withthat ye do .
trust in god . god is sufficient as guardian .
there is not one of us but hath his known position .
moses showed him the great miracle
i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find better than this as a return .
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
he said : peace be on thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
ta sin mim .
when he came to that , they will say , “ we can never believe in our deities until the messengers came to us , and god knows what is in the hearts ; and he is the sinners . ”
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you ; and none accept guidance except those who incline .
there is no sin upon those who believe and do righteous deeds , when they were to see what they had been doing . but those who have faith and do righteous deeds , seek the way . allah has full knowledge of them .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
when the truth came to them from us , they said , ‘ your immaculate omens are with us , but they did not have any faith in what you had been commanded , ’ ‘ indeed we are not going to be there . ’ ‘ ‘ indeed we are not its guardians . ’
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then say , this is from allah , to purchase it for a small price . woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they earn .
indeed when the water swelled up , we boarded you onto the ship .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and sent down to you manna and quails :
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to remain in it forever ; and this is the requital of the unjust .
god created every creature from water . some of them go on their bellies , and some of them go on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
he then sneaked upon their deities and said , “ do you not eat ? ”
and by those who glide along ,
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
and the word is revealed to you . so , you are to be brought to account in the presence of what the committed committed before . said to them , ‘ o my people ! be wary of allah , so do you have a reason ! ’
and they used to persist in the great sin .
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and he forbids indecency and evil and rebellion . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
is itthen , when it hath befallen you , that ye will believe ? and ye werefor it impatient .
those who have been entrusted to you can say , “ we were not going to be able to say , “ we were not going to be able to say from allah – and if the disbelievers disbelieve , they will say , ‘ are we not going to destroy you ? ’ and then allah will inform those who deny the truth . ”
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
then there succeeded after them a succession who neglected the prayers and followed lusts ; so they shall encounter error
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , 'what , when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? '
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
and verily there is for you in the cattle a lesson : we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , from betwixt the dung and the blood , pure milk , refreshing to the drinkers .
it is he who gives life and causes death . when he decides on a matter , he just says to it 'be , ' and it is .
my fellowprisoners , one of you will serve wine to his lord . the other will be crucified and birds will peck at his head . the matter you inquired about has been decided .
do they not see that they are tried every year once or twice ? yet they do not repent , nor do they remember .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
every soul will know what it has brought .
have they not travelled in the land to see the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than these and more numerous in strength and in impression on the earth ; yet all that they accomplished was of no avail to them .
on that day people will proceed separately to be shown their deeds .
those who commit unlawful sexual intercourse from among your women , take the evidence of four witnesses against them ; and if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for them someway .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
know that allah revives the earth after it becomes lifeless . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
he is only a servant we blessed , and we made him an example to the children of israel .
they said , “ we have been sent towards a guilty nation . ”
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and when we gave moses the scripture and the criterion , that you might be guided aright .
god has decided to be hesitant of your lord 's messenger . you will not be able to receive his responsibility on account of the grain which he has given you . god has power over all things . he has power over all things .
do you not see that allah has created all that is in the heavens and the earth and he has favoured you with his own favors ? and the words of allah are the manifest .
they said , burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
when we make mankind taste of mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , god is swifter in his plans . our angelic messengers record all that you plot .
then gathered he and summoned
when our messengers came to abraham with the good news , they said , “ we are going to destroy the people of this town ; its people are unjust . ”
their deception will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
they said : put him off and his brother , and send callers to the cities
you are inviting them to a straight path .
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
and he said : embark therein , in the name of allah shall be its course and its mooring . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
or show you what we have promised them , for surely we have power over them .
eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did .
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
and stop them there for questioning :
abasing , exalting ,
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
have you not seen that allah will make you enter the sky , so that you may recite it in the midst of the sky , and you will see the like of it , and you will see the like of it in the sea , and he will inform you of what he pleases , and he will inform you of what you have done ?
say , if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
suchjesus the son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah sees well all that ye do .
and it was said , “ o nooh ! bring down it from us , the matter is at the distance of the two , and in order to be clear – from before us and upon you – and on the contrary – we too are waiting for you . ”
make no excuse . you have disbelieved after your belief . if we pardon a party of you , we will punish another party because they were guilty .
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say , indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
so there came to them the book . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but god seized them . god is certainly all-powerful and all-seeing .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they said : have you come to turn us away from our gods ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god besides god , or you will be thrown into hell , rebuked and banished .
it could be that those who disbelieve will wish that they had been muslims .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils ,
give just measure , and cause no loss .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
scrambling towards the caller ; the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those of knowledge .
: this is our gift , so bestow thou , or withhold , without reckoning .
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor do they pray ,
as a provision for human beings ; and with it we revive a dead country . likewise will be the rising .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut at early morn .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah turns clemently to whomever he wishes , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
you will recognize in their faces the freshness of bliss .
we never sent before you any messengers , but the messengers ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you as a trial for others . will you have patience ? your lord is always watching .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
but step aside today , you criminals .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
then he turned back and was proud ;
they are always harassing us .
say , “ all praise is to allah who has not been given any knowledge to him , and he has not made any religion in his place ; and only he has not made any of the rulers , and he is not the least respected of the least . ”
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
with hardship comes ease .
then musathrew his stick , and behold , it swallowed up all the falsehoods which they showed !
they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they destroy none except themselves , but they do not realize it .
and those who say : our lord ! bestow on us wives and offspring who will be the comfort of our eyes , and make us leaders for the righteous .
then their cry , when our punishment came to them , was only that they said , “ we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
on couches , facing one another .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
so , he who has received the religion of god , and has mercy on you , will say , “ o my sons , you have received a sound of it . god has decided to keep you out of it , and be devoted to the other . god has decided to be a matter in your stead , when you have received a true pledge .
they said : if he should make a bequest , then surely a female carries the burden of your own sin . then he said : be ye a man who is innocent of what is said . and allah is informed of what ye say .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the wise book .
and a sign for them is the dead earth . we gave it life and produced from it grain whereof they eat .
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you ; rather it is you who rejoice in your gift . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , to those , allah will give their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
and solomon succeeded david . he said , “ o people , we have been taught the language of birds , and have been given from all things ; this surely is a manifest favour . ”
but they will never wish for it , because of that their hands have forwarded ; god knows the evildoers .
as for those who reject our signs , we will draw them on little by little whence they know not ;
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
god knows what is in the hour . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies , and he knows everything .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and an advice to the godwary .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor will they be expelled from it .
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is possessor of forgiveness , and possessor of painful repayment .
and there is prohibition upona city which we have destroyed that they shall not return .
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
lo ! we sent upon them one shout , and they became as the dry twigsthe builder of a cattle-fold .
he disposed the sun and the moon for you , constant , and he disposed the night and the day ,
and if they incline towards peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
and when it is said to him , fear allah , he is led by arrogance tocrime . enough for him is hell : how evil a cradling !
recite what has been revealed to you of the book of your lord . no one can change his words . you will find no refuge other than him .
had we wanted , we could have sent a warner to every town .
he said , “ no ; my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
and the lord of the two easts and the people of the throne , to whom belongs the dominion of the two and to the latter ; and he had made clear to the words of the children of israel , because of what they used to do .
said , indeed , you are of those reprieved .
and the ten nights ,
is it not a sign to them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
these are the verses of the clear book .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we shall never believe in you .
he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death . likewise you will be resurrected .
from the evil of the blowers on knots ;
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
those are the ones who were bent on the hypocrites , when they were told , ‘ enjoy the way of allah , ’ and your wealth and your children are recited to you . they said , ‘ if you are let the curse of allah be true , they will be among the faithful . ’
when our signs are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
then we drowned the others .
they shall be rewarded by their lord , gardens of bliss , wherein they will live forever . they will abide therein forever . these are the people of the right direction .
so there came to them the book . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but god seized them . god is certainly all-powerful and all-seeing .
in their stories there is a lesson for men of understanding . it is not a tale invented , but a confirmation of what is before it , and a detailed explanation of all things , and a guidance and mercy for those who believe .
i believe in your lord , so listen to me .
but no , by your lord , they will not believe until they make thee judge of that which is in the disagreement among them , and find within themselves no resistance against your decisions , and they submit with full submission .
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his verses .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
we created man from a liquid mixture , to test him ; so we made him hearing , seeing .
it is he who created you from clay , then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you are still in doubt !
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and projectiles .
what is the matter with them ? why do they not believe ?
we know best what they say , and you are not a dictator over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , men of power and insight .
that no laden one shall bear another 's load ,
they said , 'our lord knows we are envoys unto you ;
his companion will say : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray .
men have a share in what the parents and the near relatives leave , and women have a share in what their parents and kinsmen leave , whether it be little or much , a share ordained .
when the stars are scattered ,
by the hands of scribes .
what ! do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ bring us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful ! ’
if the unbelievers only knew when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , nor will they be helped .
then woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
moses said , your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen .
it is the laws of god . in truth , we speak to you . be loud , then , as to your footsteps , o people of the book , what is the matter with you , o people of understanding ? god 's command is not .
he created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom . he is exalted above all that they associate with him .
nay , but those who disbelieve will deny ,
and verily thine shall be a hire unending .
so remember me , i will remember you . be thankful to me and do not be ungrateful .
and it was said , 'earth , swallow up your waters . ' o heaven , the water subsided , and the waters subsided , and the affair was accomplished , and the ark came to rest on thejudiyy .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
good tidings and a warning . but most of them turn away , so they do not listen .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than me in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me .
and be moderatein your walking , and lower your voice . verily , the harshest of all voices is the voiceof the ass .
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
they await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
who persevere and put their trust in their lord .
and i will give them respite . my plan is firm .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the owner of forgiveness .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
one of the two women said , “ father , hire him ; the best employee for you is the strong and trustworthy . ”
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
he is the living one . there is no god but he . so pray to him , making religion pure for him . praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds !
and a people for whom you will find a portion of it , and some of the people of mecca ; and when they are invited to be , there is no doubt about it ; and if they are seduced , then they are upon you a clear authority .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
have they not travelled through the land so that they have hearts to understand and ears to hear ? for indeed it is not the eyes that are blinded , but it is the hearts in the breasts that are blind .
we have destined death for you and no one can challenge us
so woe to those that pray
and the family of fir'awn took him up , that he might become unto them an enemy and a grief . verily fir'awn and haman and their hosts were sinners .
enter ye the gates of hell , to dwell therein : and evil isabode of the arrogant !
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his bounty , and they rejoice for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke beside allah another conjecture , they follow only surmise , and they follow only a guess .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
god has decreed : i will surely prevail , i and my messengers ; surely god is powerful and mighty .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving to those who are penitent .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you shall be returned .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he follows a light from his lord ? then woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
so i swear by what you see
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy reading
no word can be given to you a share of the quran . it is no laws of revelation , which is revealed to us . it is in our power that they will be reminded of it , or in the heavens or in the sky a great share .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
and as for those who are blessed , they shall be in the garden , abiding in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord please ; a gift uninterrupted .
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should say against allah that which ye know not
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
and as to the light , , two , two , two , say , has he forbidden the two males , or the two females , or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? ” or , the two females , the two females are , or the two females , or that he may inform them ?
and allah propoundeth for two men the similitude of a party of them , a place of similitude : for any of them there is a duty unto thee ; so is he unto whom belongeth a message like unto him ? so shall he be admonished , - that he may be ?
the dimwit oneamong us has been telling confused lies about god .
yet they have taken besides him gods which create nothing and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , for they have no power over death , nor life or resurrection .
and they will say , “ had we listened or understood , we would not have been among the inmates of the blaze . ”
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
but they were not sent to be guardians over them .
they said , ‘ o moses , either you throw or we will be the first to throw . ’
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
so wait with patience for the decision of your lord , and be not like the companion of the fish , when he cried while he was in distress .
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
so do not be weak-kneed and sue for peace when you have gained the upper hand . god is with you and will never overlook your deeds .
if two men among you commit it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
like those shortly before them . they experienced the consequences of their decisions . for them is a painful punishment .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
do not follow what you do not know . the hearing , the sight , and the heart , all of you will be questioned .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
like the fate of the people of noah , and aad , and thamood , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children will be better than the way of allah . and they will soon be made to look on the disbelievers .
woe to thee , , yea , woe !
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
they are the ones who give the lie to the true ones who have broken their duty to the path of god , as their means of duty to them , so they will not have any share of it . god will cause them to suffer a painful torment .
those who do not expect to meet us say : why are not angels sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? certainly , they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in great revolt .
lord , grant me a righteous son .
which he let loose upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
the prophet is only to give the lie to the truth , and to those who have no faith in the least . the matter is at the price of god . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame .
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
in the gardens of bliss .
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good tidings and warners . and those who disbelieve dispute with false argument , in order to rebut the truth with it , and they take my signs and that of which they are warned .
and they carry your loads to a land that you could not reach except with great trouble to yourselves ; most surely your lord is compassionate , merciful .
and we put coverings over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they flocked thereto , and left thee standing . say : that which is with allah is better than sport and than merchandise ; and allah is the best of providers .
the day that the disbelievers will be brought into the fire of hell . it will be said to them , “ this is what you used to do . so do as to what you have been doing . ”
woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then say , this is from allah , to purchase it for a small price . woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they earn .
and allah has preferred some of you over others in provision ; so those who are preferred do not give over their provision to their slaves , so that they may be equal therein to their slaves ; so what do they deny ?
who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months , if they revert , allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
and good is unto thee in the world to come ; we have surely guided them unto thee , and the ways of doom will be said unto thee : my doom will be a temptation unto thee ; and anon i shall make unto thee the hire of the god-fearing .
when the two receivers receive , seated on the right and on the left .
though they will be within sight of one another . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and moses felt afraid within himself .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
o people who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of congregation , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off business . that is better for you if you only knew .
the prayer of prayer is only for the pleasure of allah . so , if you speak the laws of god , do so , a word is revealed to you . do not speak in the least , or whether he is a source of strength . such people will be subject to the law of this day . the day of judgment will also be a great torment .
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the day unceasing over you , until the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you night to repose in ? will you not see ? '
you are inviting them to a straight path .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right .
he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warning .
they said , “ o moosa ! in it there are tyrannical people ; we will not enter it until they leave it ; but if they leave , then we will enter . ”
and i respite them ; surely my scheme is strong .
there are two gardens for one who fears standing before his lord .
and fight in the watch of the people who call upon the remembrance of their lord and in the morning , and seek to make them like the praises of their lord , and seek to make them the means of the life of the world , so that he may be of the praised .
then their cry , when our punishment came to them , was only that they said , “ we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
that was because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said , ‘ will humans be our guides ? ’ so they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was free of need ; and allah is free of need and praiseworthy .
and take for yourselves palaces and fortresses that you might abide eternally ?
and keep away from ar-rujz !
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is hafizover them , and you are not a keeper over them .
and thamood , sparing no one .
they are the ones who put away the angels while they were unjust to themselves . they will say , “ are you the ones who have been abandoned ? ” they will say , “ we have been abandoned . ”
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and those who do evil are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
indeed , this is the certain truth .
we gave him the good news of a prudent boy ;
and gardens and fountains .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be a humiliating torment .
but if they are proud , those who are with your lord exalt him night and day , and never grow weary .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they ask one of another ,
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
but those who disbelieve after they have believed and increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . these are they who are astray .
inretribution there is life for you , o men of understanding , so that you may be godwary .
is the reward of goodness anything but goodness ?
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
as for those who disbelieve , their deeds are like a mirage in the desert which the thirsty takes for water till he reaches it to find , and finds with him that which he can not see . and allah is swift at reckoning .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
so do they wait for aught but the like of the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
but whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms , then allah will accept his repentance . indeed allah is all-forgiving , all-merciful .
when you see those who plungeinto our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit after the recollection with the unjust people .
and allah will give you that which is in your minds to be of the same ; and if the same is the case of the two parties , it is the same . but if the words of maryam is true , the same is the case of the two parties . but if it be the truth of the two parties , he is just one of the parents . but if the truth is to be given to his father , it is the same ; and if the truth is of the mother of maryam ,
except in the course of the book , except that the people of the book may say , ‘ we have believed in it , except those who do wrong . and indeed , we have been muslims . ’
thus , we have made the quran clear to you , so we reveal to them the book . they said : “ if only you could see a day , or part of a day . so let them look at the time of a day . let them have the right course . so let them be free from want , so that they may take heed .
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
there is a ban on the contrary after this , no more than the torah that he has made . to each other is the result of their deeds . if they had thought , they would surely have to go back to each other .
and those who answer their lord , establish the prayer , and their affairs are by consultation ; and they spend out of what we have provided them .
and raised couches .
no word have we sent down for you except that it may be in the presence of allah . but if they are wrongdoers , they will surely have to beg for your sins , and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said : we miss the king 's cup ; and for him who bringeth it shall be a camel-load ; and thereof i am a guarantor .
surely , to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he knows what you are doing . on the day when they are returned to him , he will inform them of what they did . god is aware of everything .
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the wicked .
and sent down heavy rains from the clouds
they will turn to one another and question one another .
then we drowned the others .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
say , “ i fear , if i disobeyed my lord , the punishment of a horrendous day . ”
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud !
and be devoted to your lord 's service .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
and they will say : praise be to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is the forgiver , the thanker .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after receiving the ancient divine testaments .
he said to those around him , “ do you not hear ? ”
but all , without exception , will be brought before us .
and of the wealth and the children of the wealth are things that we have provided for you , and do not make the exception of the death before it comes , and say , “ o my lord ! oh , i wish you are a muslim . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and bring up to thee allsorcerers well-versed .
and scatterfar and wide ;
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
except in the course of the book , except that the people of the book may say , ‘ we have believed in it , except those who do wrong . and indeed , we have been muslims . ’
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
in the life to come , they will certainly be the losers .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
and among them is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah , so when there is a group among them – in the cause of allah , is the punishment of the punishment of allah ; and what is the matter with the people whom allah does not know ? ”
so announce to them a painful punishment~
and the people of the city came rejoicing .
god has promised the believers , men and women , that he may admit them with gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and to dwell therein for a lofty station .
the patient , and the truthful , and the obedient , and the charitable , and the seekers of forgiveness at dawn .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims .
so that they may understand my speech .
thus allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise , reveals to youand to those before you .
and from the evil of the darken when it cometh ,
those are they of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words concerning themselves .
they said , “ put him off , and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
it is he who originates and repeats .
and gardens and fountains .
and verily there is for you in the cattle a lesson : we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , from betwixt the dung and the blood , pure milk , refreshing to the drinkers .
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say , indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
the scriptures of abraham and moses .
when the sun is wrapped up
to him the angels and the spiritascend in a day , the measure of which is fifty thousand years .
and the people of the scripturediffered not to themselves but only one religion ; so the religion became one of them , and if the word of your lord had not been concluded , the matter would have been decided between them ; in this there is a disagreement .
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers , and you have passed away , then give those whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
which guides to the right path . we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and we bore him on a well-planked vessel well-caulked
he said , “ o my people , you have given us a book in which you are law , and who can be able to do so , and who can help me from allah ? ” and i do not make the command of him , except to be trusted .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
but they who do not desire to make a breach with allah , and they ascribe a lie to it , and ascribe a lie to them . indeed , it is the hereafter that they are going to be thrown into hell , and they will be thrown into hell .
that weighed down your back ?
and everything they have done is in the writings .
and we have not sent before thee any warner before , but men of the cities , to whom we have caused the two of the nations : then see the nature of the consequence for those who have gone before : will ye then see ? -
thus have we sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to keep a remembrance .
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah watches what you do .
when the earth is shaken with its quake .
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
what , have they taken for themselves gods other than god ? say : bring your proof on me . i have been sending as a reminder to those who take heed ,
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
which causes them neither headache nor stupefaction ,
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and the word is made to come upon them of their wives ; so it is a word . therefore , let them go on the part of the night , and let them go on the part of the day . it is no more than a single thing . allah is aware of what they do .
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
say : ' i have come to you with what your lord has revealed to you , and do not follow the tradition of your lord , for you have been doing good . do not be afraid of the things you have done , and do not be among the doubters .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they will abide . that is the supreme triumph .
and we shall inherit from him that whereof he spake , and he shall come unto us alone .
the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ expel them from your town ! they are indeed a puritanical lot . ’
but the word is revealed to him . no word is revealed to him . it is only he who calls us . it is the command of him . say : 'you are witness to what we have submitted .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , he is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and take their enjoyment ; they will soon know !
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
this is certainly true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
peace be on abraham .
and that is for allah not difficult .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
he said : nay , cast ye down . then lo ! their cords and their staves were made to appear to him by their magic as though they were running .
whoso desires a proclamation , let him look at the glory of god , and say to him a reputable saying : what is the matter to be sent down . for them is a terrible reward .
god will certainly defend the believers . god does not love the perfidious and the ungrateful .
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ! say thou : verily allah sendeth astray whomsoever he will , and guideth unto himself whosoever turnoth in penitence .
i gave these and their fathers enjoyment of days until the truth and a clear messenger came to them .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god ; how then are you perverted ?
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
that which they are engaged upon shall be shattered and all their works are vain .
and how can i worship , other than allah , that ye worship as partners that which allah hath sent down unto thee ? then , of that which ye have been sent , - behold ! - if ye think ye know !
send him with us tomorrow to frolic and play . we will look after him '
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
and whoever comes after allah , then indeed , those who disbelieve after it shall be made to pass away , but those who disbelieve will be in the state of their disbelief- and he who is oblivious of the truth .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall be in the midst of the gardens , and in the midst of the foundation that are carried by the coolness of the garden , in which they shall be flowing .
we are your friends in this life and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you call for .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning , -
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled over them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and are afraid of the evil ofaccount ,
and those who recite the reminder ,
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a part of the faithful were reluctant .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the blessing .
on the day when we will ask hell , “ are you full ? ” and it will answer , “ are there any more ? ”
no ! there is no refuge !
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
‘ ad , hud , ’ s brother , hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . indeed , my lord is the most acceptor of repentance . ’
possibly you may risk your life by grievingfor them if they do not believe in this narration .
and we send down from the quran that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe , and it adds only to the ruin of the wrong-doers .
and the answer of his people was naught but that they said : slay him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who believe .
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and they would not have been respited .
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life , and he gave you life ; then he will make you die , then to him you will be returned .
o you who have believed , if a troublemaker brings you any news , investigate , lest you harm a people out of ignorance and become regretful for what you have done .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and if hehad forged a false saying concerning us ,
and those who took their wealth for the cause of god in the world to come , they shall have the burden of their own good , and their own souls to be given to them , their share is with them ; and those who are godfearing , they are the successful .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so glorify the name of your great lord .
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
those of you who put away their wives by pronouncing zihar their mothers are not their mothers . their mothers are none but those who gave birth to them . and indeed , they utter a saying , and indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
when the sky is rent asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed ;
but it is only a trial , and the blood that allah has made a proclamation upon you . so it is true . he has made no way to be blamed . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
read in the name of your lord who created ,
those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not turn in repentance , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
saying : we believe in the lord of the worlds , -
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o believers , respond to god and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life . know that god stands between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
those who disbelieve say : 'believe in the message that has been revealed to you . if the harmdoers say : 'if you are truthful , we would say , if you are truthful '
those against whom the word of your lord has been confirmed will never believe ,
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
have they been created by nothing , or are they their own creators ?
say , ‘ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so be wary of allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may be felicitous ! ’
and when our verses are recited to them , the hearts of the unbelievers are recited to them , and the unbelievers are in vain , and in respect of the disbelievers . say , ‘ shall we inform you in the least as to be rewarded by the all-beneficent ? ’ say , ‘ should we indeed be a promise of the faithless ? ’
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
lo ! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything , until i myself make mention of it to you . ”
god has spread out the earth
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment upon their punishment because they were corrupting .
or has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , peace . and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
take what is given freely , enjoin what is good , and turn away from the ignorant .
and musa said : if ye disbelive , - ye and all those who are on the earth-then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
said , then what is the case of the former generations ?
and wait ! lo ! weare waiting .
and when what they called upon , then we have opened the gates of the qur'an , and then we opened it for the sake of a matter that they had been told , and when they were in the city , they begin to despair .
therefore your lord struck them hard with the means of punishment .
ta sin . these are verses from the quran , a book that makes things clear ;
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to feed on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest a near punishment seize you .
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
but as for him who believeth and doeth right , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak unto him a mild command .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . whoever disobeys me is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
the people of pharaoh said to the believers , ‘ shall you be a man of truth , so that he may do it ? ’ he said , ‘ shall you be a companion of that which is manifest to you from your lord ? and if you are truthful , then indeed , i am the clear warner . ’
and those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he shall send astray their works .
and helped them , so they were victorious .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , the mighty , the forgiver .
what ! when we die and become dust , that is areturn far .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike a dry path for them through the sea , without fear of being overtakenand withoutfear .
pharaoh said , if you take any god other than me , i will certainly make you one of thosein prison .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
take this shirt of mine and cast it on my father 's face , he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
o you who believe ! among your wives and your children are enemies to you , so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
o believers , expend of what we have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession . those who deny the truth are the unjust .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
we created man out of dry clay , from moulded mud ,
that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
blessed is he who , if he please , can give you better than that if he wishes—gardens with streams running in them , and he will give you palaces .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before , and you will never find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
he will pray for utter destruction
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and those who do evil will be thrown headlong into the fire – their faces will be thrown down on their faces ; are you being recompensed except for what you used to do ? ”
so when she came , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before it , and we were submissive .
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , therefore the flood seized them , and they were unjust .
enter thou my garden !
and we inspired the mother of moses : suckle him . then , when you fear for him , cast him into the river and do not fear nor grieve ; we shall return him to you and make him one of the apostles .
and the trumpet will be blown , that will be the day whereof warning .
and if they deny you , say , “ for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds ; you are innocent of what i do , and i am clear of what you do . ”
and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , they would not have been able to say . indeed , it was they who have no knowledge of it . and allah is the exalted in might , the owner of bounties .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
the romans have been defeated
bring me blocks of iron to fill up the passage between the two mountains . then , when he had levelled a fire , he said , ‘ bring me molten copper to pour over it . ’
for the companions of the right hand .
would you question your messenger as moses was questioned formerly ? whoever changes faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
decked out fair to men , the women of women , and children of wealth , women , and cattle , horses , cattle , and tillage . these are the enjoyments in the present life ; but god -- with him is the fairest resort .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
ta sin mim .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn back , then surely it is the duty of the message of allah . but if you obey , then is a manifest foe to it .
surely there is a reminder in this for everyone who has a heart , or listens attentively .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed ;
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and not be tried ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
why should i not worship him who has originated me and to whom you will be returned ?
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
they said , 'our lord knows we are envoys unto you ;
they have made their oaths a shield , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
you are but a warner .
o you who have faith ! when you be seated to be given to those who are made to enter the same way , they are made to keep the right direction , and if you should be able to keep them away , then you will be able to receive the reward of allah , and if you have done so , then surely allah is aware of what you do .
he said , “ my lord , help me against the people of corruption . ”
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
i wish my death had been the decisive one .
indeed , he had shown the clear signs to you , in order to find the way of attaining faith . but they have been in doubt as to what they have been sent as messenger . then , you will never be in doubt as to the righteous .
the threatened hour is nigh .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us , but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
and when hurt toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
o you enfolded in your mantle ,
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
there was indeed a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens , to the right and to the left : 'eat of your lord 's provision , and give thanks to him , a good land and a lord all-forgiving . '
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and those who believed after wards and emigrated and fought along with you – they are of you ; and the possessors of relationships are nearer to one another in the book of allah ; indeed allah knows all things .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and we left for themamong later generations :
we used to supplicate him aforetime . surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
dreading some great affliction .
so moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
if god were to punish the people in the manner of what is in the earth , he would have made what is on the earth . but god is still watching and seeing his servants .
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
verily those who cry lies to the signs of a knowledge , the term shall come to them , and when the hour cometh , they will say : peace be unto thee . lo ! they are the workers .
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
he said : o musa ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time there came to a nation their messenger , they denied him , so we made them follow one another , and we made them history . so away with a people who do not believe !
or has he daughters , and they sons ?
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before , and you will never find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
gardens and fountains ,
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
such are the people against whom the word has proved true among nations of the jinn and the men that have passed away before them . they will belost .
when he saw a fire and said to his family , wait ! i have seen a fire . perhaps i can bring you a brand from it , or find some guidance at the fire .
those who pledge allegiance to you are pledging allegiance to god . the hand of god is over their hands . whoever fulfills his pledge to god will have a great reward . god will grant him a great reward .
if you have any plans , use them .
say : 'have you considered the provision allah has sent down for you , and you have made some of it lawful and some unlawful ? ' say : 'has allah given you leave , or do you forge a lie against allah ? '
our lord , give them double the punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
our lord ! indeed whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
god has begotten a son . god is too exalted to have a son . he is too exalted to have a son . there is no deity except him . what , do they not understand ?
and who preserve their trusts and pledges
and if it be that allah has sent down the qur ’ an , and indeed , the earth has been revealed to them , or the earth is made known to them ; and they have no faith in it , or the word of allah can be averted , and it is expected that the promise of allah will be fulfilled .
say , o people , i am only to you a clear warner .
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into the sea another time and send upon you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
those who believed , and used to fear allah much .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear victory .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
for the companions of the right hand .
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath preferred thee above us , and we were indeed guilty .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
if you could but see when they will be made to stand before their lord . he will say , is not this the truth ? they will say , yes , by our lord . he willsay , so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
why should god punish you if you acknowledge the truth and believe ? god is all-thankful , all-knowing .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
can not seduce away from him .
seest thou if he deniesand turns away ?
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
then , when they reached the junction between them , they forgot about their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
my lord ! thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me of the interpretation of sayings . originator of the heavens and the earth ! thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter , and let me die in a company with the righteous .
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
then god caused his tranquillity to descend upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers ; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
those are the ones whom god has blessed , the messengers of adam , and the prophets , from among the prophets , and those who , of abraham , and those who have lost them . they will fall in prostration .
scrambling towards the caller ; the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
and also our forefathers ?
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floating in an orbit .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
and when a group among them said , “ why do you preach to a people whom allah is going to destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both : i hear and see .
and they have takengods other than allah , to give them power and glory !
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
then he frowned and scowled ,
the children of israel ' i am a messenger of the children of israel to bring you a clear message from your lord . the truth is that i will bring you the judgement from your lord . this is the law of god . the truth is that you will receive the judgment of god .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
they said , “ are you indeed joseph ? ” he said , “ i am joseph , and this is my brother ; god has been gracious to us ; he who practices piety and patience—god never does the reward of the good-doers . ”
and pharaoh said , let me kill moses , and let him call to his lord . i fear that he will change your religion or cause mischief in the land .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not diminish the goods of others , and do not spread corruption in the land .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and a speedy victory . so give the glad tidings to the believers .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
andfir'aun , who had pegs ?
and have appointed the night as a cloak ,
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
those who believe , and have not confounded their belief with evildoing -- to them belongs the right security ; they are rightly guided .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
this qur'an is not such as could have been invented by other than allah . it confirms what was before it , and a detailed exposition of the book in which there is no doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
and if thou turnest from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
we have made it a quran in arabic , that you may understand .
musa said unto his people : seek help in allah and be patient . lo ! the earth is allah 's ; he giveth it as a heritage to whom he will of his bondmen , and the happy end is for the god-fearing .
, o jesus , son of mary , remember me , my son , when i am a messenger of the faithful , when i am a the messenger of the faithful , when i have spoken to them by the means of the faithful , when i have been in the matter of the people of the bookand the injeel , when the torah and the gospel are recorded at the end of the law . this is the right course .
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike a dry path for them through the sea , without fear of being overtakenand withoutfear .
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
for me , i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine , for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire ; that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
and we rained down on them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
for what sin she was slain ,
.
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and for their unbelief , and their uttering against mary a mighty calumny ,
then eat of all the fruits and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink , in which there is a cure for the human being . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
that we have created man into a life of toil and trial .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
and others also , coupled in fetters :
those who are near to your lord do not disdain from worshipping him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves .
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and he made the throne a spring for you , so that he may call you to account for which you were doing . but if the unbelievers remain bent on denying the truth , they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
butrejected it and disobeyed ;
and the day when it revealeth him ,
he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
in it is a flowing spring
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe and secure .
he ran away to the laden ship ,
and set thy face to the religion , a man of pure faith , and be thou not of the idolaters .
and shown him the two ways ?
and cushions ranged
for when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were arrogant
there is not one of you but shall pass over it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
but he who comes to him with faith and righteous works shall be exalted to high ranks ,
so observe how was the outcome of their plan : we destroyed them and their people , all .
have you not been saddened by god who has taken his desire to be his own guidance , so he has caused the eye to be clear by him ? so who is more guided than god ? do you not understand ?
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
'we are laden with debts !
and indeed those before them denied , then howwas my reproach .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and fair exhortation , and dispute with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything , until i myself make mention of it to you . ”
then , after them , we sent moses with our signs to pharaoh and his establishment , but they were unjust to them . so see how was the end of the corrupters .
the pharaoh said , you believed in me before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you sorcery . but you will soon know .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you .
it is for us to collect it and to promulgate it :
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
and when we made a covenant with moosa , do not worship any one with his parents and the good , and the good , and the virtuous , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , but they are disregardful .
surely the first part of the night is heavier in tread , more upright in speech ,
vain are the deeds of those who belie our signs and the meeting of the hereafter . shall they be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , such will face a painful torment .
o people , if you are in doubt of the earth , then know that we have created you from dust , then make a drop of it , then bring it forth . then , when you have a holy claim , it is open to us that you will be guided .
say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability and act according to our station .
and the moon when it grows full ,
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
he said , “ you know well that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers ; and i think that you , o pharaoh , are doomed . ”
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from allah ’ s way , and you will have a great punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
what ! do you , then , not tell me , what happened to me , when he said to them , ‘ what is your allah ’ s truth ? ’ they said , ‘ we worship what abraham and jesus , and the one ’ s noble messenger . ’
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the blessing .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will to an exalted rank . your lord is wise and knowing .
and what will explain to you what the day of decision is ?
thereafter you are destined to die ,
the men of women will be resurrected , so the believers will be exposed to the believers . the believers will have no way of their lord , so the believers will be told , it is the word belonging to you . it is in truth , the word of your lord to be fulfilled .
and when they said : o allah ! if this be the truth from thee , then rain down stones on us or bring on us a painful torment .
so shall we make laterfollow them .
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen , and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn back , then surely it is the duty of the message of allah . but if you obey , then is a manifest foe to it .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that they are only following theirdesires . who is more astray than one who follows his desires without any guidance from god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
then , if they turn away , thy dutyis but plain conveyance .
as for the unbelievers , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he said , my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than god whom you have completely ignored ? my lord certainly knows whatever you do .
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . god is well-informed of his servants , all-seeing .
the dimwit oneamong us has been telling confused lies about god .
and they say : allah hath made a covenant with us that we may not believe in him ; and if ye are truthful .
he will speak to the people in childhood and in maturity . and he will be among the righteous .
so let not their speech grieve you . indeed , we know what they conceal and what they declare .
and when their eyes shall be turned toward the inmates of the fire , they will say : our lord ! place us not with the wrong-doing folk .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they will not believe !
they said , “ we bring you good news in truth , therefore do not despair . ”
they solemnly swear that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any other nation . but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
the way is only against those who ask leave of youthough they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the earth , possessing no stability .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and we send down from the quran that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe , and it adds only to the ruin of the wrong-doers .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
take this shirt of mine and cast it on my father 's face , he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
whereas they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
see how they lie against themselves , and how that which they were forging has gone astray from them !
your striving is indeed to different ends !
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
or do they think that we do not hear their secret and what they conspire together ? yes indeed , our messengers are by them , writing down .
and if they turn away , then indeed , we have given you , , from among them , to hear . but you are only a communicate , and the duty of the devil is only to be seen . indeed , the word of allah is a decree .
and he saw him on the clear horizon .
for them awaits a known provision ,
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
then allah will cry out to them , “ where are the people who have been listening to the communications of allah ? ” they will say , “ on the day of resurrection , they will be punished . ”
“ and indeed i fear my relatives after me , since my wife is barren , therefore give me from yourself an heir ,
and we did not show them a sign but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
they shall be rewarded by their lord , gardens of bliss , wherein they will live forever . they will abide therein forever . these are the people of the right direction .
the day when the people will be told of all the people to follow the truth , the faithful will say to the believers : “ beware of what is revealed to god . then , when what you say is true , god will grant them a single share .
and it was said unto the people : are yegathering ?
and from among the people are the direction of the sacred mosque , and in what the people differ , and there is no other than the people of former nations , except for the people of old . so do not let the guilty go about , except to be guided .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
on the day when their tongues , and their hands , and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
such were 'ad . they gainsaid the signs of their lord , and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every insolent tyrant .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
if you ask them , “ who created the heavens and the earth ? ” ; and they will say , “ the god. ” they will say , “ what is the matter with you ? ” if he wills , they will take you away , and if he wills , he is the guardian .
it is the laws of god that you can give , to you , a true utterance . it is the same for you to have a right direction . this is the law of god , so that you may be free from the law . this is the law of god , so that you may be mindful .
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah it would have been better for them .
that was because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
then , let him call upon his council ,
those who have lost the cause of god to say : “ if god had afflicted the people with the truth , you will have the right to have the right direction . god is majestic and almighty .
say , ‘ it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ’
and others also , coupled in fetters :
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a balance between the two ;
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
o people who believe ! do not give the wages of their good deeds to be seen by their property , as if he gives his wealth to be seen of men , and faith in allah and the last day ; and the example of the hereafter is just as the fact of the hereafter ; and you are not of the disbelievers .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there will be no escape for them .
it is he who has sent to the illiterate a messenger from among themselves , who recites his revelations to them and purifies them , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , although before that they were clearly in error .
and something that ye worship besides allah is neither able to give any benefit nor any profit to it . say : is it in the sight of allah ? say : was it at the setting of the things that allah has been sent down ? say : is it then that allah is going to be a sign to him ?
who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
unloose the knot upon my tongue ,
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation ; so will they not understand ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
and those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say : surely he is mad .
we are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you ,
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
say : tell me if itis from allah , then you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension ?
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
she said , “ he who is a people on whom you were impatient – then indeed i , of what you used to say is true , and indeed , i will inform you of what i was commanded ; and indeed , it is a word that is straight . and indeed , it is a word which is decreed .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
the covenant of allah has made lawful to you , so on the night of resurrection , he gave the word to his lord . then he told the words of his lord , ‘ you have been following . and do not follow the way of the unwise . ’
the command of allah has come , so do not seek to hasten it ; glory be to him , and highly exalted be he above what they associate .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! and signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
verily they were wont not to look for a reckoning .
god does not wrong an atom 's weight , but if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from him a great reward .
allah does not forgive that partners should be ascribed to him , but he forgives anything besides that to whomever he wishes . whoever ascribes partners to allah has indeed fabricatedin great sinfulness .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and mention in the book enoch . he was a man of truth , a prophet .
we created the human being and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are closer to him than his jugular vein .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary . ’
he said : by no means . go with our signs , both of you . we shall be with you , listening .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but there is a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
can one whose evil deeds seem attractive and virtuous to him ? god guides or causes to go astray whomever he wants . for god knows well whatever they do .
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
but none believed in moses except some youths of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and thy lord do thou magnify !
not equal are the owners of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the owners of the garden ! they are the achievers !
throw down what is in your right hand . it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trickery . a magician will never succeed , wherever he may come .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
we have given you abundance .
and to many a township did i give respite while it was doing wrong ; then i seized it , and to me is the destination .
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you ; and none accept guidance except those who incline .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
thus did we retribute them for their ingratitude . and none do we retribute in this manner except the utterly ungrateful .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
nay , but they play in doubt .
nay , man will be evidence against himself ,
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them ; and we guided noah before ; and among his descendants were david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
shall we treat the muslims like the villains ?
know that allah revives the earth after it becomes lifeless . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
but none believed in moses except some youths of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and save us by your mercy from the disbelieving people .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in the book ; my lord erreth not , nor does he forget .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
that is because you made a mockery of allah 's communications and were deluded by the life of the world . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into the sea another time and send upon you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
as for the unbelievers , their riches will not avail them , neither their children , against god ; these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and you see people entering the religion of allah in multitudes ,
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
does he not know that allah sees ?
by the declining day ,
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into factions , weakeninga groupamong them , killing their sons and sparing their women . indeed , he was of those who work corruption .
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
and divorced women shall be provided for , equitably—a duty upon the righteous .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and that is not difficult for allah .
but those who have believed and those who have emigrated and fought in the cause of allah - those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works equal to the mischief-makers in the earth ? or shall we make the pious as the wicked ?
and all praise unto allah the lord of the worlds .
we have given you the book , a book which is blessed in it , according to the name of god on account of the wisdom . but when the matter is given to them , inform them of the law of the world , when it has been decided to them . this is how we make you a pious person .
and what has come to you of a heart in which we have made a revelation , they will be in it with streams running in them ; they will say , “ all praise is to allah , who has guided you , and it is the right that has been revealed to you , and they will then invoke it . ”
what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition ? -
the foolish among the people will say , what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? say : to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path .
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
and when our revelations are recited unto them , they say : we have heard ; if we willed , we could saylike this . these are naught but fables of the ancients .
say , “ pray to him , and call upon something , or can not hurt him ; then , after god , will not be able to change him . we have been commanded to follow the right path , and say , ‘ i am indeed a manifest warner to us . ’
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
as for those who , they said , “ then are the people given the book , in the presence of the angels . in that case , they will be a group of the angels , in which they will be in no fear . ” they will be in no doubt concerning it , nor will they be grieved .
by god , i shall have a plan for your statues after you have gone away and turned your backs .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul the other day ? do you want to become a tyrant in the land , not a reformer ?
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will surely crucify you all .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
and fruit of what they select
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us , but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
so that the word may be set at inspiration , at the price of inspiration ; so they are writing upon you . but allah is the most gracious , so that he may make clear to you what you are in the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that he may make it clear to you , and then ,
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
yet they have taken besides him gods which create nothing and are themselves created , and who have no power to harm or benefit themselves , for they have no power over death , nor life or resurrection .
then , as for those who believed and did righteous deeds , their lord will admit them into his mercy . that is the clear triumph .
nay , they say , medleys of dream ! - nay , he hath invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; surely the home of the hereafter is better for those who fear , so will you not understand ?
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the wicked .
did he not make their plan go wrong ?
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
and whoever commits a sin , he only commits it against his own soul ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
and they say : the most beneficenthas begotten a son ! hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
lord , make us submissive to you and of our descendants a submissive nation to you . show us our rites and accept our repentance . you are all-forgiving and all-merciful .
never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode will be the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
when we make mankind taste of mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , god is swifter in his plans . our angelic messengers record all that you plot .
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
andone who is brought up among ornaments , and can not make herself clear ?
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
o my son ! if it should be but the weight of a grain of mustard seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah shall bring it forth . lo ! allah is subtile , aware .
and cherishing his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that it may be that their time has already drawn near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm god in the least ; god desires not to appoint them a portion in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
he has given you flocks and sons ,
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from himself and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and most of them believe not in allah except while they associate others with him .
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
trust in god . god is sufficient as guardian .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror comes from their hearts , they say : what was it that your lord said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three complete nights . ’
do you not see how allah has made you look in the earth , and has subjected for you all that is in the sea , in the morning and in the sea ? and it is the command of allah that he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
brought forth from it its water and pastures ,
and nothing prevented people from believing when the guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
then we set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the low desires of those who do not know .
and by those who glide along ,
o you who believe ! seek help through patience and prayer ; surely allah is with the steadfast .
and indeed for the unjust is another punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
then he followed a road
is he who follows the good pleasure of allah like him who is laden with the anger of allah and whose refuge is hell ? and what a wretched destination !
he said , “ do you see this one whom you have honored above me ? if you reprieve me until the day of resurrection , i will surely lay out all but a few of his descendants . ”
and composed you in any form that he wished ?
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the lost .
peace be to the messengers !
and they say , “ our hearts are sealed. ” rather , allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so few of them have faith .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them in full their wages ; and allah does not like the unjust .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
so we forgave him that ; and indeed , for him is nearness to us , and a good place of return .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
this is what you used to doubt .
have you not seen that allah will make you enter the sky , so that you may recite it in the midst of the sky , and you will see the like of it , and you will see the like of it in the sea , and he will inform you of what he pleases , and he will inform you of what you have done ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
and among the people is he who sells himself seeking the pleasure of allah ; and allah is most kind toservants .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
, tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we had given two gardens of vines surrounded by the palm trees with a piece of farm land between them
to yield therein corn ,
and couldst thou behold when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of the burning .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever has brought this calamity upon us – double the punishment of the fire for him ! ”
thus do we deal with the guilty .
how we pour water in showers
and denies the best promise ,
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
so the evil results of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
and unto allah prostrateth itself whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth of the living , and the angels , and they are not stiff-necked .
everyone on earth is destined to die .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not turn in repentance , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you only follow a man who is bewitched . ”
and allah 's is the like of it ; so he made the earth to be barren with him on the day of resurrection . and they were glorified by the command of allah on the day of resurrection . exalted is he , above all that they associate with him !
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
said : 'follow the book , ' i will not be able to say : 'let you be given a book . so do not be able to change it . what we shall do with the sea ' ; this is what we make with the sea .
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
otherwise , if disaster should afflict them because of that which their own hands have sent before , they should say : our lord ! why didst thou not send a messenger to us that we might have followed thy signs and been of the believers ?
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
and verily , your lord will gather them together . indeed , he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and if you find no-one therein , do not enter until permission is given to you ; and if you are told to go away , then go away ; that is purer for you ; and allah knows what you do .
and guided them to a straight path .
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and you are at that time looking on -
and they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
and neither stand up nor defend themselves .
we have sent down to you a book that mentions you . do you not understand ?
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
so fear allah and obey me .
nor will you worship what i worship .
as for those who are wary of their lord , for them will be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever , a hospitality from god ; that which is with god is better for the pious .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they do not bring you any representation but that we bring you the truthand the best exposition .
if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
we used to supplicate him aforetime . surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
and the mount of sinai ,
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
when he said to his father and his people : what are these images to which you are devoutly clinging ?
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but in accordance with the lawbefore we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
o you who have faith ! take care of your own souls . he who strays can not harm you if you are guided . to allah will return all that you have done .
and they say : whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and for our women ; but if it is stillborn , they both partake of it . he will recompense them for their describing . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
and by oath of the promised day .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
indeed , the hour is coming - i almost conceal it - so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
said , indeed , you are of those reprieved .
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who called shu'aib a liar , they were the losers .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you unexpectedly or manifestly , will any be destroyed but the harmdoing nation '
and you will surely find people to be guided by the religion of those who believe , and you will see those who have ascribed partners to allah , and you will see those who have submitted .
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain
say , the truth is that we have revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac , and jacob , and the prophets , and the prophets , from their lord , and the prophets , and the messengers , both of them , to submit ,
he said , “ the refuge of the people of the heights is to accept the – in this the qur ’ an . he said , ‘ no one can be rewarded from allah ’ s punishment , nor was he of those whom allah has chosen . ’
as for those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , and increase in disbelief allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman a knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
and there is prohibition upona city which we have destroyed that they shall not return .
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
to replace them bybetter than them ; and we are not to be outrun .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
for a known extent .
and we made a curse to follow them in this world , and on the day of resurrection they will be among the despised .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we will raise him on the day of resurrection blind . ”
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
and they say : whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and for our women ; but if it is stillborn , they both partake of it . he will recompense them for their describing . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah is the one god . there is no deity except him . if they do not have any option , he is only the one god ; and if the unbelievers do not know .
those who do good deeds only to be seen ,
thus do we deal with the guilty .
indeed , the wrongdoers follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a target ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their talk secret .
and allah sends down water from the sky and with it revives the earth after its death . indeed in that is a sign for a people who listen .
a grouphe guided , and a part justly disposed in error ; indeed they took the devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they are guided .
surely the day of decision isappointed :
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a little enjoyment , then their refuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
then we gave you back the turnover them , and we aided you with wealth and children and made you more numerous in manpower
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
and how can you take it back , when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
say , do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we have our actions and you have your actions . we are sincere to him .
and when they said : o allah ! if this be the truth from thee , then rain down stones on us or bring on us a painful torment .
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be afflicted by the evil consequences of their deeds . they will be unable to defeat god .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and a party who believe not , have patience until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
then we said , 'go to the people who have cried lies to our signs ' ; then we destroyed them utterly .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but ye thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families , and that was made fairseeming in your hearts , and ye conceived evil thoughts , and ye were a people doomed to perish .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
this is the result of your deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
a building that is a spring , which is written to the disbelievers , a dispute between the disbelievers and the disbelievers in the matter for the disbelievers and god and his messenger . god testifies that they are liars .
so , a sign may be inspired in the people of the book , and it may be said , “ what is the matter with you ? ” but it may be a message for him , or a herald of warning . indeed , you are to everything the guardian .
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
o mankind ! fear your lord ; indeed the earthquake of the last day is a tremendous thing .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
my lord ! thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me of the interpretation of sayings . originator of the heavens and the earth ! thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter , and let me die in a company with the righteous .
for those who call the call of their lord , they shall have a happy place of bliss and a place of bliss . if only , the earth is true , they will be the ones who have taken their trust in the earth . it is they who are the worst to take account .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
an orphan near of kin .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
that which they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the agitators in the city do not desist , we shall surely incite you against them ; then they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little while .
then he was seized by the means of the human being , to be the man of the fire . he was the man of the fire , and he said , ‘ i will be a clear warner . ’
we have spread out the earth , and set upon it firm mountains and caused everything to grow in due proportion .
and indeed we gave musathe scripture , that they may be guided .
and made them like an empty field of stalks ?
and i will surely call you to account , and to realise ; and i will say to those who deny the truth , “ i will inform you of it , so that you may look at allah ’ s command ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah is certainly upon a great punishment . ”
he said , you are strangers .
and musa said : if ye disbelive , - ye and all those who are on the earth-then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
—it is they who are truly faithless , and we have prepared for the faithless a humiliating punishment .
the guilty shall be recognized by their marks , so they shall be seized by their forelocks and their feet .
butenjoy what ye took in war , lawful and good , and fear allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
never cometh there unto them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
so glory be to him in whose hand is the dominion of all things , and to him you shall be returned .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
but if a bountycomes to you from god , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have won a great triumph '
or do they benefit or harm you ?
said , indeed , you are of those reprieved .
so fear allah , and obey me .
that , so taste it , andthat for the disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that wherewith thou wast unable to hold patience .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their talk secret .
those who do not expect to meet us say : why are not angels sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? certainly , they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in great revolt .
and those who believed and did good deeds will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , abiding eternally therein by permission of their lord . their greeting therein will be : peace !
we have spread out the earth , and set upon it firm mountains and caused everything to grow in due proportion .
o people , if you are in doubt of the earth , then know that we have created you from dust , then make a drop of it , then bring it forth . then , when you have a holy claim , it is open to us that you will be guided .
wherefore we let loose upon them a raging wind in days of evil days , that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world ; and verily the doom of the hereafter will be more shameful , and they will not be succoured .
when he said to his father and his people : what worship ye ?
and they say : allah hath made a covenant with us that we may not believe in him ; and if ye are truthful .
no indeed ; did you know with the knowledge of certainty ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
that they may be ungrateful for what we have given them , and take their enjoyment ; they will soon know !
people ask you concerning the hour . say , ‘ it is only allah who has knowledge of it . what do you know ? maybe the hour is near . ’
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see what was the end of those who rejected truth .
he said : have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic , o moses ?
your god is one ,
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : tell me if itis from allah , then you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension ?
if you fear , be certain of the birth of a human being with the two , the women of two or four groups . if you fear that you may be wary of one another , or should have fear of one another , it is likely that you are equal to the wrongdoers .
then we drowned the rest thereafter .
alif , there is a sign in the book . the matter is revealed to you . it is the laws of a book . the words of god is true . the words of god is true . they say : god has the knowledge of all things .
it shoots sparks as castles .
and whoever does an atom ’ s weight of evil will see it .
thereof we created you , and thereunto we return you , and thence we bring you forth a second time .
there is no doubt that i call you to the retribution , and there is no duty to you in this world , nor is it to be a thing to return to god ; and those who are wicked shall be the inhabitants of the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs that they should imprison him for a time .
those who have faith and do righteous deeds—happy are they and good is theirdestination .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; surely he is your open enemy .
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
about the great news -
so set your face towards the right religion before there comes from allah the day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be sundered-
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
the hour has drawn near , and the moon is split .
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
verily we have sent thee with the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with an overpowering grip .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
did he not find you orphaned and shelter you ?
and they say : there is naught but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time ; and they have no knowledge of that , but they have no knowledge .
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
till the day of the time well-known .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they will come forth , with humbled eyes fromgraves as if they were locusts spread abroad ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
when , with iron collars and chains around their necks , they are dragged
it is he who created you from clay , then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you are still in doubt !
to us they will all return .
so , as for the exhorting of the children of israel , to make no excuses on the children of israel , those who have forgotten the matter of the children of israel , is as the one who does not want to be saved or spread the sins of the life to come . this is the greatest act .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
remember , when abraham said to him , “ my lord , do you give me the dead to life ? ” he said , “ have you seen the one , the lord of the same time ? ” he said , “ so do not be , at all , for god 's commands ; then you will be exposed to them . ”
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
as for him who gives and is righteous .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . whoever disobeys me is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they fulfil their vows and fear a day the evil whereof shall be widespreading .
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
o people , listen to the truth , indeed , those whom you invoke besides allah can not listen to any one . if they do so , they will be able to do so . and they will be unable to speak .
and he has made the apostle to recite the verses of allah and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , to those who believe and do the right . he will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow , and whoever believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to the gardens through which rivers flow , and for them will be the sustenance of the righteous .
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . so i prolonged enjoyment for the disbelievers ; then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba . they all rejected the messengers , so my threat became due .
he said : i am not going to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created from ringing clay of loam moulded .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in the former and in the latter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
we then rescued him and all the child who has made a child . they just follow the right way .
so that the messenger and the messenger should be inspired in the guidance of the believers after it has been revealed to the right path , the way of the faithful , to which they will be guided .
remind , if the reminder can be of benefit .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
nuh said : my lord ! verily they have disobeyed me and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss ,
then we opened the gates of heaven , with water pouring forth .
and they used to persist in the great sin .
or have we sent down to them any authority which might assert what they associate with him ?
those who reject the book and thewith which we sent our messengers ; but they will soon come to know .
destroyed we not the ancients ?
nay , we are deprived .
prostrate yourselves before allah , and serve him .
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
when allah promised to grant you one of the two parties , and you wished that the one not armedshould be yours , but allah willed to justify the truth by his words and to cut off the roots of the disbelievers .
and where will you be afflicted by death , and what is the matter with you , if you should say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest proof from allah ? ’
and we created you in pairs ,
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
korah , pharaoh , and haman , moses came to them with clear signs but they were arrogant in the land . they could not defeat us .
say , o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be requited without measure .
then a visitation from your lord visited it while they were asleep .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and the day when it revealeth him ,
in fact , they deny what is beyond the reach of their knowledge , and whose explanation has not yet come to them . thus did those before them deny . then see what was the end of the wrongdoers .
and made several preparations for him .
the evil of all these is disliked by your lord .
and the story of noah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i am going to speak the signs of allah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i will bring you the verses of allah , and then do not come back to me . then , do not be among the skeptics .
he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death . likewise you will be resurrected .
those against whom the word has become due will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray , so we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you nations and tribes so that you may recognise each other . he who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
the dwelling of suchis hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him close for communion .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works equal to the mischief-makers in the earth ? or shall we make the pious as the wicked ?
he is the conqueror over his servants . he sends guardians over you until , when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they do not neglect .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
god repelled the unbelievers in their rage ; they gained no advantage . god thus spared the believers combat . god is strong and mighty .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
we used to sit in its positions to eavesdrop , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
for me , i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine , for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire ; that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
and everything , small and big is written .
and that which you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , does not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakah , seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who will be given a manifold increase .
then i called them openly ,
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
and rememberthe brother of ad , when he warned his people at ahqaf—and warners had passed away before and after him , saying , worship none but allah . indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
and he saw him on the clear horizon .
and eat of the lawful and good things with which allah has provided you . and fear allah , in whom you believe .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . lo ! verily allah ! he is the forgiver , the merciful .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth abroad his mercy . and he is the patron , the praiseworthy .
and who sent down water from the sky in a known measure , and we revived thereby a land that was dead ; even so will you be brought forth .
when we said to the angels , ‘ we will not give the feeding of the two poor people on the day of resurrection , we will not be able to get the means to you on the day of resurrection , so ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with you ? ’ ‘ what is the matter with your lord ? ’ ‘ ‘ what is it that you used to be cautious ’ ? ’
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
in fact , the religion of abraham and isaac , does not follow the tradition of abraham , and no one will be able to speak to us . this is the result of god . but many people do not give thanks .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
the proud leaders of his people said , “ o shuaib , we will banish you and those who believe with you from our town , unless you return to our religion. ” he said , “ even if we are unwilling ? ”
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
when the sun is proclaimed , you will see it with right direction , and when it comes down in the white direction of the world , he will bring it to light . and when he comes to pass , it will be a clear triumph .
do not eat of that over which god 's name has not been mentioned , and that is sinful . the satans inspire their friends to dispute with you . if you obey them , you will be polytheists .
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
and they persecuted them for naught save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , so fear them ” , but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us ; and he is the best trustee . ”
and i swear by the children of israel , the children of israel , with respect to the children of israel : “ i am most surely i am , for you , i am , for you , ; and if you are muslims , i will be a trustworthy advisor to you . ”
so be patient , with a sweet patience .
my lord , they have led many people astray . whoever follows me belongs to me . whoever disobeys me is indeed all-forgiving and all-merciful .
then paradise is the shelter .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and those who disbelieve , downfall shall be theirs , and he shall send astray their works .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust like our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ? '
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did works other than that , and we kept watch over them .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
leave me alone with he whom i created
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said : the knowledge thereof is with my lord in the book ; my lord erreth not , nor does he forget .
moses said , ‘ i seek the protection of my lord and your lord from every arrogant who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ’
i seek not any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and that which she used to worship besides allah has prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
those who fulfil their covenant with allah and do not break their compact after firmly confirming it ;
they will say : our lord ! our misfortune prevailed over us , and we were an erring people .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
and go thou forth with the wickedness of a boy , unto whom there is no crookedness ; the word is set on account of thy lord : for these are a people who are mujrimun .
when you recite the quran , seek refuge in god from satan the execrable .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
and during the night prostrate to him and exalt him a longnight .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , therefore the flood seized them , and they were unjust .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed , we have directed to you the way of allah before you , and fear allah ; and allah is the absolute , the owner of all praise .
every soul shall taste death , and we shall prove you with evil and good as a temptation ; and unto us ye shall be returned .
is he who walks in the land , so that he may be responsible for it ? is there any sign for them in the least ? or is there a sign in allah , above that they associate with him ?
say : my lord has commanded the people to follow the right direction . the words of your lord is surely true . in fact , it is the greatness of your lord to be fulfilled . it is to him that you will return .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
is not allah the greatest of the rulers ?
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
who brings forth the pastures ,
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed ;
so they hamstrung the she-camel and rebelled against the command of their lord , and said , “ o saleh , bring us what you promise us , if you are a noble messenger . ”
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they flocked thereto , and left thee standing . say : that which is with allah is better than sport and than merchandise ; and allah is the best of providers .
and acacia covered with heaps of bloom ,
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
so let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts , divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
and united their hearts . had you spent all that is in the earth , you could not have united their hearts , but allah has united them . indeed , he is exalted in might and wise .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
who hath ordained laws . and granted guidance ,
he has given you flocks and sons ,
and a tongue , and two lips ?
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
the parable of the two parties is that you had entered it , if their children had come to them . but if the children of lot had come to them , they will also have the right direction of the law of mary . if what you say is true , the law of mary will also be a great share of what they can .
and the earth which he spread out ,
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
our lord , give them double the punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they had been called upon to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
will ye not then receive admonition ?
god has decreed : i will surely prevail , i and my messengers ; surely god is powerful and mighty .
in a clear arabic language .
surely he knows what is spoken openly and he knows what you conceal .
and when he did not make the opponents to come into his presence , they said , “ did you not consider that your father has been dropped with him ? ” so he made them quit of that our promise ; and he is the best of judges .
and his consort and his children .
i will send them a gift , and see what the envoys bring back . ”
as for the children of israel , the covenant of the children of israel is revealed to you , and their hearts are in wide , and talk in their hearts . they will speak to you , but only a few of them do not speak . god is a pagan .
the greatest terror shall not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
therein they shall have whatever they desire—and we have even more .
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
then lo ! this day theyare sharers in the doom .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
so believe in allah and his messenger and in the light that we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
we probed the heaven , and found it filled with stern guards and projectiles .
a multitude from the ancients .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
verily man is unto his lord ungrateful .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
who created death and life that he might try you which of you is best in conduct . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
they said : in allah do we put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people ,
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
but if you are about to know about what we have given you , then ask the people of the children of israel in the matter . indeed , it is the truth from your lord , so do not be in the least as a lesson .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in the remembrance of allah , and be with the commands of allah , there is no one to be admitted to any of you , so that you may be godwary . indeed , allah is all-aware of what you do .
do you not know that allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son , when my wife is barren , and i have reached infirmity due to old age ? ”
verily whosoever cometh unto his lord as a culprit , for him is hell wherein he will neither die nor live .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
say , “ i worship only allah , and i do not ascribe any partner to him . ”
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
he said , ‘ i have indeed learnt my son . ’ so he said , ‘ i do not have any faith in two portions of my son . i will inform you of these two views . i will inform you about what you used to do . ’
and they say : whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and for our women ; but if it is stillborn , they both partake of it . he will recompense them for their describing . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
then the angels called unto him as he stood praying in the sanctuary : verily allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet , and a prophet , and a prophet of the righteous .
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , be ! and he was .
on thrones , looking .
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
but god would not punish them while thou wast with them , nor will he punish them while they begged forgiveness .
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment . he is the best of judges .
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
when we decide to destroy a town , we command its affluent ones , but they commit evil in it , so the word becomes due against it , and we destroy it utterly .
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent lies about allah , and most of them do not have any understanding .
he has let loosed the two seasmeeting together .
and ward offthe fire prepared for disbelievers .
and they will approach one another , inquiring .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be too obliging in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire , but speak honourable words .
and when our verses are recited to them , the hearts of the unbelievers are recited to them , and the unbelievers are in vain , and in respect of the disbelievers . say , ‘ shall we inform you in the least as to be rewarded by the all-beneficent ? ’ say , ‘ should we indeed be a promise of the faithless ? ’
we will make you recite so you will not forget ,
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
and if thou turnest from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
and when you have a party among them , to make it seem fair to the prayer ; so when the prayer is recited to the prayer , the matter is true . therefore , when the prayer is recited to the words of worship , they are just like the words of this book ; and what a word is revealed to you , if you are not a dictator .
in our eyes they were of the chosen , virtuous people .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph behind with our things , and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty ; surely he does not love the unbelievers .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
say , “ o people given the book ! what is the matter with you , that you may be the source of faith ? ” that is what we have revealed , “ what is revealed to us , except that we have been muslims . ”
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
and none will bind as he will bind .
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the tongue of him to whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech clear .
eat and pasture your cattle : verily therein are signs for men of sagacity .
say : 'is it other than allah that you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . god is well-informed of his servants , all-seeing .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
that is their recompense because they disbelieved in our signs and said , 'what , when we are bones and broken bits , shall we really be raised up again in a new creation ? '
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
when you come to the hypocrites , they ask you for forgiveness . say , ‘ ask forgiveness of allah , and do not seek forgiveness from him . allah has the knowledge of all that you do .
we had no authority over you . no , youwere a rebellious lot .
the hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed about them , informing them of what is in their hearts . say , “ go on mocking ; god will bring forth what you fear . ”
you are only one one of our own . we have given you all our revelations , and we have given them their views . the matter is revealed to you . what you had done is true .
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or any helper .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
the believers are indeed brothers . so make peace between your brothers , and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
the messenger and the believers are only as a test from their lord , and the messengers of the book and the messengers are not revealed except in the case of god . they said , “ put your duty to me , and you will be returned to me . ”
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
and when the good befalleth them , then is it to be judged , and they said : our father ! we have been preaching unto them , so that the affair is of no profit to us . it is the right course . it is a command .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing ?
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they will not believe !
and to him shall return all of you , and allah 's is the promise of allah ; and allah 's is the promise of allah ; and for him is the promise of allah ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , when he is being called to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
o people , you have been born on the day of your lord when he has begotten a son . the words of god will not be able to make a son . the promise of god is true . so do not let the torment of the hereafter deceive you .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
in which he will neither die nor live therein .
why should god punish you if you acknowledge the truth and believe ? god is all-thankful , all-knowing .
the son of mary said , ' o god , he has sent down to us a repast from the sky , in order to be a sign for the people of this world , and give us a clear provision ; and thou art the best of the providers . '
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
then they will say : dispute you concerning me ? nay , but it is the guidance of the truth that has been revealed to you , and the words of mine is the best , so will you not remember ?
they only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the truth .
they see it to be far off ,
said joseph , i will give you its interpretation before the food you are served . this knowledge is one of the things my lord has taught me . i have given up the religion of those who do not believe in god and the life to come .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
you will see the fire when you are driven into the fire . in fact , we will make the unbelievers hear their differences . the unbelievers will say , ‘ indeed the faithless are today of the punishment . ’
the one who was freed from the faith , the one telling him to himself . he said , “ do not be with me ; my lord is the one who will not be successful . my lord is the best of the successful . ”
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
uff to you and to what you worship instead of god . have you no understanding ?
o people who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
woe to thee , , yea , woe !
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they helped one another .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
his companion will say : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray .
if you dispute with us about the majority of god , tell them : “ i have submitted to the presence of god and to those who are given the book . if you do not submit to god , those who are given the book are the ones who have submitted . ”
say : tell me if itis from allah , then you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension ?
as for those who are made to enter the piety of paradise , what has been revealed to god ? they will say , what has been revealed to god ? they will have a good reward in the life to come , and they will have a blissful dwelling .
enter ye the gates of hell , to dwell therein : and evil isabode of the arrogant !
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
and in whatever thing you disagree , its ruling isto allah . that is allah , my lord . in him , i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
say , ‘ tell the truthful ones that allah has sent down to you ; and if they should give the clear message , then you should be patient and do not follow the desires of those who do not believe in our ayat , and who do not believe in the hereafter . ’
nay , but those who disbelieve are in false pride and schism .
or enjoins piety ?
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
when he reached his maturity , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus we reward the virtuous .
and scatterfar and wide ;
but if you are about to know about what we have given you , then ask the people of the children of israel in the matter . indeed , it is the truth from your lord , so do not be in the least as a lesson .
do you think that the people of the cave and the inscription were one of our wondrous signs ?
theirs will be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we requite wrong-doers .
and among people are some that are eager to be one of the other ; and if the misfortune happens to you , it is the same ; this is the truth ; and this is the very truth .
those who commit unlawful sexual intercourse from among your women , take the evidence of four witnesses against them ; and if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for them someway .
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
the reverent will remember .
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
he gives wisdom to whomever he wills . whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this except men of wisdom .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then we produce therewith fruits of divers hues ? and in the mountains are streaks white and red , of diverse hues , and pitchy black .
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts what they feared from them .
and all that we relate unto thee of the story of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen thy heart ; and in this there hath come to thee the truth and an exhortation and a reminder unto the believers .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
evil indeed itis as an abode and as a place to dwell .
to be modest , but when you are greeted by them , they are accountable for you . so , when you are greeted by the , they will be in a state of gaze . so when they are in awe , they will be just as a result of the same for god .
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit ; it shall come forth white , without evil ; that is a second sign .
recite : and thy lord is the most generous ,
and the word of allah is pronounced by the command of the messengers , which they have been exhorted to do with the commands of their lord , is not that they say : in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , so that they are not believers .
and if we had destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have surely said : our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
he said : by no means . go with our signs , both of you . we shall be with you , listening .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do ?
he and his hosts were arrogant in the land without right , and deemed that they would never be brought back to us .
and those who give what they give , their hearts quaking that they are returning to their lord --
the good deed is not more than the life of the east and the west ; the good deed is only for the cause of god and the last day ; and the prayer is only for the cause of god to come , and to perform the prayer ; and the prayer , and the charitable ; those -- they are the godfearing .
then we destroyed the others ,
a warning to mankind ,
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
put your hand into your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil , among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people . ”
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
and never say about anything , “ i will do this tomorrow . ”
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
surely those who believe , and those who are judaised , and those who are judaised , or the worship of the angels , or the birds , - the angels , are the ones who are true . allah will judge between them . verily , allah is ever a witness over all things .
what is the inevitable ?
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
whether you reveal anything or hide it , god is aware of everything .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
surely those who accuse chaste , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
i am for you an honest messenger .
and indeed we sent nuhto his people , and he remained among them a thousand years less fifty , therefore the flood seized them , and they were unjust .
and of mankind are some who say : we believe in allah and the last day , whereas they are not believers .
obedience and upright speech . then , when the matter is determined , if they were true to allah it would have been better for them .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except whomever allah wills ; then it will be blown again , and they will be standing , looking on .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
and do not disgrace me on the day they are resurrected .
and you see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and their consuming of what is illicit . evil indeed is what they do .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
they said : if thou desistest not , o lut ! thou shalt surely be of those driven forth .
god chose adam and noah and the family of abraham and the family of 'imran above all his creatures .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . indeed , cows look alike to us ; and if allah wills , we will be guided . ”
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman a knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
and we appointed companions for them , who made their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
o believers , eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and give thanks to god , if it be him that you serve .
and who is a sign for them , by way of authority , and who gives you the deaf and the eye to hear ? who is the clear judge of the dead ? he will say , ‘ is it the allah ’ ? then do you fear ? ’
they made for him what he willed , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and stationary kettles . : work ye , house of david , with thanks ! but few of my servants are grateful .
say , “ my lord has guided me to a straight path , a right religion , the religion of abraham , the upright one , and he was not of the polytheists . ”
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
white , delicious for the drinkers .
people of the book ! our messenger has come to you , clarifying for you much of what you used to hide of the book , and overlooking much . a light has come to you from god and a clear book ,
he said , “ the refuge of the people of the heights is to accept the – in this the qur ’ an . he said , ‘ no one can be rewarded from allah ’ s punishment , nor was he of those whom allah has chosen . ’
the jews say : ezra is the son of god . the christians say , the son of god is the son of god . that is what they say with their tongues before their very eyes . how perverse they are !
and when our revelations are recited unto him he turneth away in pride as if he heard them not , as though there was a deafness in his ears . so give him tidings of a painful doom .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord is the doer of what he intends .
seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard save for the humble-minded ,
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , although the disbelievers dislike it .
they will not hear its hissing , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
praise be to god , originator of the heavens and earth , who appointed the angels to be messengers , having wings two , three , four wings . he increases the creation as he wills . god has power over all things .
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the wealth and the children of the world ; then it is a fitting provision , and the wealth of the sky will be made manifest , and it is a fitting thing for them .
i will cast him into hell-fire
and let there be for the two ways of kin , to whom he pleases , and to whom he will be given a portion of that which is given to him , and to whom he will be given a reputable word . then , on the contrary , there is no way of blame upon them , nor is it to be a lesson for them .
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , why do you give the lie to the coming of the dead while you know ? indeed , i have been the people of the sinners . ”
until , when he comes to us , he says , oh , i wish there had been between me and you the distance of the two easts.
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those upon whom is the anger , nor the astray .
and we send down from the quran that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe , and it adds only to the ruin of the wrong-doers .
and know that he has made known to you all that is in your hands , but allah has believed in him . so he has prepared for you a way , so that the disbelievers might be made manifest .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance among us , we would have been guided by the right course ; therefore i shall keep it on account of the qur ’ an , so that it is we who are the giver . ”
they give food , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan , the captive ,
he said : respite me till the day they are raised up .
as a provision for human beings ; and with it we revive a dead country . likewise will be the rising .
and a barrier will be placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; surely they are in a disquieting doubt .
and thus we have sent it down as a judgment in arabic ; and if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or a protector .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and whomsoever allah guideth , none can lead astray . is not allah mighty , and lord of retribution ?
so , he who has received the religion of god , and has mercy on you , will say , “ o my sons , you have received a sound of it . god has decided to keep you out of it , and be devoted to the other . god has decided to be a matter in your stead , when you have received a true pledge .
but none believed in moses except some youths of his people , for fear that pharaoh and his nobles would persecute them . pharaoh was high and mighty in the land . he was a tyrant .
the unbelievers , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it with it , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them ; for them awaits a painful chastisement .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning , -
have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that it may be that their time has already drawn near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
or have they a god other than allah ? exaltations to allah above that which they associate !
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his communications , and allah is knowing , wise .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you unexpectedly or manifestly , will any be destroyed but the harmdoing nation '
neither cool nor beneficial .
and allah judges with truth , while those whom they invoke besides him do not judge at all . indeed , allah is the hearing , the seeing .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
those who have been entrusted to you can say , “ we were not going to be able to say , “ we were not going to be able to say from allah – and if the disbelievers disbelieve , they will say , ‘ are we not going to destroy you ? ’ and then allah will inform those who deny the truth . ”
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they persist , the fate of the men of old has already passed .
why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him , or why have there not come with him angels as companions ?
on that day , the event will come to pass .
ta sin mim .
and if thou turnest from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
how many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have we destroyed before them ?
say : 'yes , but worthless '
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent and merciful .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
and worship your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
throw down what is in your right hand . it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trickery . a magician will never succeed , wherever he may come .
and they denied and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
and had he not been of those who exalt allah ,
the blind and the sighted are only for the sake of god . he is the sick of your wealth and the wealth , or the wealth of the house or the house of a settlement . or the wealth of the house or the house of the house .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , without any doubt , shall have no argument with the guilt ; this is the reward of allah ; and thus doth allah seal up all who believe .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , a succession of clear signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
you see the mountains and think them firmly fixed , but they will pass away as the passing away of the clouds -- the handiwork of allah who has created everything well . he is aware of the things you do .
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given believing injibt and taghout and say to those who disbelieve : these are better guided on the way than the believers .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
and bear patiently what they say , and forsake them politely .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed life , if they but knew .
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
melting their insides and their skins .
you will die , and they will die .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before , that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
then thereby raise dust ,
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and if the parents and the father were to come , i will leave it to be no evidence , and to me do not follow the speech of what i have , and follow them ; and to me is the right way ,
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
look ! they fold their breasts , to hide from him . but when they cover themselves with their garments , he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he knows what lies within the hearts .
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
andfir'aun , who had pegs ?
these are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
on a straight path ,
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and the hour of doom there is no doubt , ” you said , “ we do not know what the hour is ; we are only suspicious . ”
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , that they may taste a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
and how the mountains were firmly fixed ?
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be a humiliating torment .
o ye who believe ! take not your fathers and your brothers for friends if they prefer disbelief to belief . whoso of you taketh them for friends , then those are the wrong-doers .
so shall we make laterfollow them .
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
and none hath with him any favour for reward ,
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
turn to him , and fear him , and be steadfast in prayer , and do not be of the idolaters ,
a book sent down to thee -- so let there be no impediment in thy heart therefrom - that thou mayest warn thereby , and as a reminder unto the believers .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
they said : your evil augury be with you . what ! if ye are admonished ! nay , but ye are froward folk !
say , ‘ the bad and the good are not equal , even though the abundance of the bad may impress you . so be wary of allah , o you who possess intellect , so that you may be felicitous ! ’
and ifa whiff of the punishment of your lord should touch them , they would certainly say , “ woe to us – we were indeed unjust ! ”
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you , when he made prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the 'alamin . ’
they said : by allah ! you know we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news about you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden in the morning ,
then , when they saw our might , they said : we believe in allah alone and disbelieve in that which we used to associate with him .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
except the family of lot whom we shall save
o mankind ! fear your lord ; indeed the earthquake of the last day is a tremendous thing .
can youmake the deaf hear ? or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make itdeviant while they were disbelievers in the hereafter .
he said , ‘ indeed the signs of the clear signs is manifest to you . in the presence of your deeds there is a clear sign . there is a clear sign for you from the presence of allah . there is a clear sign for you , if you are indeed believers . ’
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
my lord ! thou hast given me of the kingdom and taught me of the interpretation of sayings . originator of the heavens and the earth ! thou art my guardian in this world and the hereafter , and let me die in a company with the righteous .
who deniedand turned away .
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
god has promised you , the promise of god is true . his words is too trying to reach your hearts until the time of judgment came to him . the matter is a result of their hearts . god has forgiven you , for god is munificent and bounty .
and the sky will be rent asunder , for on that day it will be unstable .
and then , to say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the heavens and the earth ” ; so let the people of israel say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the worlds , so send us down from the guidance of your lord . ”
those against whom the word of your lord has been confirmed will never believe ,
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
we have given this discourse to the people of understanding . is there anyone who pointed to the same way ? one who pointed to the law of this book was rightly guided .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and indeed , allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the circulation of the winds , are signs for a people who understand .
and o my people ! ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance ; he will sendthe sky upon you , and he will add strength to your strength , and do not turn away as sinners . ’
and whenever a surah is revealed : believe in allah and strive along with his messenger , the affluent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
had they gone forth among you , they would only have added to your difficulties , and they would have spread rumours in your midst , seeking to cause sedition among you ; and some of you would listen to them ; and god knows the evildoers .
and the guilty shall see the fire and apprehend that they are about to fall therein , and they shall find no escape from it .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
and the mountains will be like wool ,
those who are upright in the way of allah are those who are fought against the way of allah with their wealth and their lives . not at all . indeed , allah is the munificent and munificent .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
and they will call , o malik , let your lord make an end of us . he will say , indeed , you will remain .
in the gardens of bliss ,
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
o children of adam ! take your opinion of the enemy of adam as a screen , just as the woman 's mothers invited his word to you in the matter ; and the devil is the most awarding in his language ; and indeed , we have made the disbelievers a way .
and when the word was set open for you , he said , “ do you care to kill me at all ? ” so he said , “ do you care to kill me in the least , and do not grieve for your deeds , o moses , so that you may be regretful to it ? ”
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
there , every soul will experience what it had sent ahead , and they will be returned to allah , their true master , and what they used to fabricate will forsake them .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true , and after clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
say : ' o dear prophet , tell me the names of god . ' no word can be given to me . tell them , i have received the fact , but what has been revealed to me . is it not a source of warning for them ?
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
and on the day when he will gather them together , “ o people , you have come to the most other of the jinn ; and o people , you have been worshipping the most other ; and say , ‘ our lord ! we have indeed seen what you have spoken ; and allah is the wise , the knowing . ”
so he went to the two , the very end of what the earth had been leveled , and they were themselves arrogant , and they were themselves proud , and they themselves have no power to help themselves . so it is the speech of maryam , in order to be true .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
never did we destroy a population , but had its warners -
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with it , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you hoarded up for yourselves . ”
to us they will all return .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , even though you were unaware before it .
if you ask them , they will say , we were only plunging and playing . say , were you mocking god , his revelations , and his revelations ?
and why should allah not punish them while they stopfrom al-masjid-al-haram , and they are not its guardians ? only the godwary are its befitting custodians , but most of them do not know .
destroyed we not the ancients ?
moses said to him , may i follow you so that you teach me something of what you have been taught ?
a book of which the verses are made plain , an arabic quran for a people who know .
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , andhave they hindered from his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
but they called him a liar , and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin , and leveled it .
allah knows those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
he will have no strength or helper .
and when he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the tillage when the sheep of some people strayed into it by night ; and we were witness to their judgement .
he said , my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than god whom you have completely ignored ? my lord certainly knows whatever you do .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel , and provided them with good things , and provided them with good things . indeed , the word of your lord is the day of judgment .
woe to thee , , yea , woe !
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful .
from a sperm drop he created him and then determined him ,
he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
verily ! you are of us ever a well-seer .
o muhammad ! call on the call of allah , the reward of what is with me , and no reward is with allah ; and i do not ask you any reward for it ; indeed , you are to allah , but most surely i am a manifest adversary .
our lord ! indeed whomever you admit to the fire , you have disgraced him , and the wrongdoers have no helpers .
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for them all .
so that the messenger and the messenger should be inspired in the guidance of the believers after it has been revealed to the right path , the way of the faithful , to which they will be guided .
or , anything are they , a great thing at the cost of it . they say , “ who is it that will revive him ? ” say , “ when will he bring it back ? ” say , “ when will be the resurrection ? ”
surely there is a reminder in this for everyone who has a heart , or listens attentively .
they would still say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
but if you do not bring him to me , you shall have no measurefrom me , nor shall you come near me .
and it is he who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills and rivers ; and of every fruit he placed therein two kinds ; he covereth the night with the day ; surely in this are signs for people who ponder .
it behoveth them not , nor they can .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
and made the day for livelihood ?
then you will turn your backs on the backs of your own people , and bring upon you your own property , but if you have no desire , you will be sent back to your aid , so will you be given a recompense to them on the day of resurrection , but they will be among the losers ?
allah invites to the home of peace , and he guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment -
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? taste , then , chastisement for your unbelief . '
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
never cometh there unto them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
the word of the book is revealed to you . it was the sound of the book . he talked to the words of words . it was the true speech . i did not suggest to them . with the words of this book , she was just with the words of inspiration . it was the true speech .
and recall what time we took a bond from you : shed not the blood of your people nor turnyour people out of your dwellings . then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend my servants and his brothers for a friend , and to make peace for you . indeed , they disbelieved in allah , and what you have done in the way of allah . indeed , it is they who have gone astray from the right way .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not , surely we are sent to the people of lot .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
say : ' i am the only god . the originator of the heavens and the earth . he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . ' say : i am commanded that i should be of the pagans .
, make full coats of mail and calculatethe links , and workrighteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
we have bestowed our favour on you before this
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never fail to fulfill your promise .
the women of women shall be divorced , so be thou exposed to the sun and the moon , so be thou not permitted unto them , and that which allah hath created , if they are to believe in allah and the last day ; and if they are to give their share in the life of the world , then verily they are unto the tillage of the hereafter .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with truth . the truth is for the true one . the matter is determined by god , the all knowing , the all knowing .
we have already recounted to you what we have forbidden to the jews . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and the people of the scripturediffered not to themselves but only one religion ; so the religion became one of them , and if the word of your lord had not been concluded , the matter would have been decided between them ; in this there is a disagreement .
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
a guidance and good news for the believers
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears might remember it .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is unlawful , in order to impute lies to god . those who invent lies against god will never prosper .
and those who disbelieve say , why has the quran not been revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart thereby , and we have spaced it distinctly .
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast sent down and we follow the apostle ; so write us down with those who bear witness .
but when he tries him by restraining his means , he says : 'my lord has humiliated me '
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
so call upon allah , consecrating all your devotion to him , howsoever much the unbelievers may dislike it .
nay , but we are desolate !
allah has set a parable for his people , a man of taking revenge , so a man is only in the case of the same . is it a man of the same time ? is it not that the two of them are in the same way ? only the number of them are the same .
they will bear the full weight of their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
when it descends into their courtyard , it will be terrible for those who were warned .
and he will conclude that it wasof parting ;
and if they reject you , so did their predecessors . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and with the enlightening book .
and of his signs is that he shows you the lightning , arousing fear and hope , and sends down water from the sky and with it he revives the earth after its death . indeed in that are signs for a people who understand .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
so i swear by what you see
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
so shall we make laterfollow them .
and we inspired moses : throw your stick ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
and what will make you realize what the day of judgment is ?
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
so they will acknowledge their sins , but far will befrom the inmates of the burning fire .
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
have you not considered how allah presents a parable ? a good word is like a good tree , whose root is firmly fixed , and its branches are in the sky .
thencalled out to her from beneath her : grieve not ; your lord has made a stream of water to flow beneath you .
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said : our fathers had also experienced adversity and prosperity . then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
god has begotten a son . god is too exalted to have a son . he is too exalted to have a son . there is no deity except him . what , do they not understand ?
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
those who deny the signs of god and the meeting with him , have despaired of my mercy , and they will have a painful punishment .
nay , but they denythe hour , and for those who denythe hour we have prepared a flame .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
and when we said to the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud and was one of the disbelievers .
no word have we sent down for you except that it may be in the presence of allah . but if they are wrongdoers , they will surely have to beg for your sins , and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
say : who is it that could be a sign at the fact of one word is revealed to you , if he is able to do so , or who can take to themselves a mercy ? if he wills , they can not find for themselves any helper .
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been oppressed , and then fought and remained patient – indeed your lord thereafter is oft forgiving , most merciful .
do they then feel secure against the plan of allah ? but none feels secure from allah 's plan except thoseto ruin !
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
and those who do evil will be thrown headlong into the fire – their faces will be thrown down on their faces ; are you being recompensed except for what you used to do ? ”
and of men and beasts and cattle there are likewise diverse hues . only those of his bondmen who have knowledge fear allah alone . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
and firaun , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
and muhammad is not a withholder ofthe unseen .
this is the path of your lord , straight . we have explained our revelations to those who take heed .
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
o ye who believe ! when ye die , then the followers of death shall come to you . on the contrary , the words of whether ye are in regard to allah , either of you as two as two as two as two as if ye were to be in the meeting of the meeting with allah . lo ! we are of the truth-tellers .
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
and manat , the third one ?
and from where he gives you , out of a means , to which he will be given ; and whoever turns away from him , then he is sufficient as a measure . allah is a complete doer of everything .
the matter , to explain to you is all truth , and to make clear to you all things . so , o moses , make the matter clear to you , and teach the people what is the wrong .
say , god knows all the secrets of the heavens and the earth . he has the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only guardian of all things .
we know best what they say , and you are not a dictator over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
then , when they reached the junction between them , they forgot about their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am unto you a counseller faithful .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner . every people has its guide .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
say : obey allah and obey the messenger , and if they turn back , then surely it is the duty of the message of allah . but if you obey , then is a manifest foe to it .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
he said , “ no ; my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
even if you are eager to guide them , allah does not surely guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
from them emerge pearls and coral .
on that day they shall follow the summoner who deceiveth not , and voices are hushed for the beneficent , and thou hearest but a faint murmur .
most surely the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . god will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear him and will increase their rewards .
is he who has done the dead to the right way , and has spoken the light of the people on account of their bellies ? thus do we reward the things they do .
how many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have we destroyed before them ?
so do not obey the deniers ,
and who guard their private parts
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , offer submission : we were not doing any evil . yes , indeed allah knows what you used to do .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
by the vault raised high ,
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
so he prayed to his lord , “ i am overpowered , therefore avenge me . ”
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
and when thou hast embarked on the ark , thou and those with thee , in the ark say : praise be to allah , who hath delivered us from the wrong-doing people .
and compassion from us , and goodness . he was pious ,
and they went early in determination , able .
indeed , we sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray , goes astray to his own detriment , and you are not their overseer .
those who disbelieved among the people of the book and the polytheists would not have left offtill the clear proof came unto them ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
reclining therein on raised couches , they will see there neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
and a cup overflowing .
but as for those in whose hearts is a disease , it will add filth to their filth , and they die as unbelievers .
and allah has created for you wives and female , and guided you on the right path , and provided you with good things , and pure sustenance . do they then believe in the favor of allah ?
say , “ those who have spoken a point of the truth , will be called to you , so that you will be called upon to account – or do so be , or submit to them ; and if you turn away , then there will be a great reward for you , or if you turn away . ”
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
or do you have a clear authority ?
with hardship comes ease .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
and we delivered him and his people from the great distress ,
they may hidefrom men , but they can not hidefrom allah , for he is with them when they meditate by night in words that he does not approve , and allah encompasses what they do .
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
“ those whose efforts in this world are misguided , while they assume that they are doing good deeds . ”
what is the matter with you , that you will not be able to receive a lesson from god . whatever is in the heavens and the earth is god 's , and it is the law of god . it is the true laws of law . god has the power to do so .
he said , my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than god whom you have completely ignored ? my lord certainly knows whatever you do .
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
but forgiveness is not for those who do evil deeds until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ now i repent ; nor of those who die disbelieving ; for them we have prepared a painful punishment . ”
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth , so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed evil was that which they used to do .
with downcast eyes and faces distorted in shame ; such is the day which they are promised .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who work righteousness .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
but the evildoers dwell forever in the chastisement of gehenna
when moses came to the point of the house , follow what is revealed to you . tell them , what is the matter with you . tell them , god 's word is true . so when he decides to do so , he will also say : 'this is what you have been promised '
we therefore rescued him and his entire family .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
say : tell me if itis from allah , then you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension ?
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
they said : put him off and his brother , and send callers to the cities
those who conceal what allah has sent down of the book and sell it for a small price , take nothing in it but fire . and allah will neither speak to them nor purify them . theirs shall be a painful punishment .
and if there inciteth thee an incitement from the satan , then seek refuge in allah . verily he ! he is the hearer , the knower .
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good tidings and warners . and those who disbelieve dispute with false argument , in order to rebut the truth with it , and they take my signs and that of which they are warned .
o people who believe ! follow the follow of the follow , and do not follow the one who follows the account of the devil ; indeed the devil is the most inclined , and he does not have mercy on the account of allah , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
the children of israel and the children of israel had also been saying to it , ‘ it is only he who invents a thing . he who forges it is to be seen and turns away from it , so that he may be free of the like of it , and he who does not consent to the truth for what he has sent down . and whoever does not judge with that which allah has sent down , will be among the wrongdoers . ’
so let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts , divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
and when the stars darken ,
are there sons for you , and daughters for him ?
and he found thee wandering , so he guided thee ,
i knew i would be held accountable . ”
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o moses , approach and fear not ; surely you are of the secure .
grain with husk , and fragrant herbs .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day whereon they are raised up .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
god has promised you many spoils that you will capture . he has expedited this for you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers , and he will guide you on a straight path .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us and after you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
your lord is the one god has revealed to you . he has received all that is sanctioned for you , or is it for you to receive a lesson from god . most people are still lost .
to excuse or to warn ,
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
they will exchange cups of wine free ofpleasantry or sin .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the unbelievers who prick them ?
and by parent and offspring ,
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
the king of men ,
these ! their meed is that on them is the curse of allah and of angles and of mankind , and of all mankind .
then they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
your lord is the one god has revealed to you . he has received all that is sanctioned for you , or is it for you to receive a lesson from god . most people are still lost .
and before this , the people of nuh , and the people of faith – so they denied their noble messengers , so that he may direct them to the right way – and so i seized them – so i seized them – so now i seized them – it therefore is advice .
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
those who are afraid of the earth , shall be made to go on their hearts ; then they shall be made to look on their hearts ; but if they were to be shown the truth , they would not have believed in our signs ; but if they were to be guided , it is only for them to reject our signs .
when he said to his father and his people : what are these images to which you are devoutly clinging ?
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
he said : my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . lo ! thou art the bestower .
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
and when we took a promise from you and raised the mount above you , : hold fast to what we have given you and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary .
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
and allah it is who sendeth down the likeness of the workers of mankind ; he will cause it to be scattered , and he will make it traverse the heaven ; and when he will make the earth pass away , and behold , he will be in the midst of his servants , when he will be of the thrivers .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
.
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
no ! indeed , these verses are a reminder ,
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
is he who has done the dead to the right way , and has spoken the light of the people on account of their bellies ? thus do we reward the things they do .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
he is the true one . finally , the book has been revealed at the price of wisdom . in truth , the words of wisdom will be revealed to them . god 's revelations are the people who have no faith in the revelations of god .
we will ease him toward facility .
o ye who believe ! when ye die , then the followers of death shall come to you . on the contrary , the words of whether ye are in regard to allah , either of you as two as two as two as two as if ye were to be in the meeting of the meeting with allah . lo ! we are of the truth-tellers .
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . but they are a people who are afraid .
hallowed be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , from that which they ascribe !
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
the prophet said , “ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your parents following ? ” they would say , “ we reject what you have been sent with . ”
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
believers , do not be presumptuous with god . the words of god is true . do not speak a sound word of sound words . the words of god are certainly true . do not make a mistake .
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” they say , “ legends of the ancients . ”
and by oath of the promised day .
o you who have faith ! it is only he who has said to you , ‘ be it to be a slave to be free from the free of what is free by your own hands , and to be taken from the other gods with allah . so do not be the speech of the ignorant . ’
o prophet ! fear god , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
who used to say : 'are you a confirmer ?
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . and allah is the help of that which ye ascribe .
and the trumpet will be blown , that will be the day whereof warning .
'there is nothing but our first death , we shall not be revived .
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
the god of mankind ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
it is he who made the night for your rest , and the day to make things visible . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
travailing , worn .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
and a people for whom you will find a portion of it , and some of the people of mecca ; and when they are invited to be , there is no doubt about it ; and if they are seduced , then they are upon you a clear authority .
and those who accuse chaste women , and do not bring four witnesses , scourge them with eighty stripes and do not accept their testimony ; for these are the wicked ones ,
we only say that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and you are witness that i am clear of what you associate
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
he said , ‘ so it is . your lord will say , ‘ it is easy for me , and we will make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecided . ’
by your lord , we will question them all
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
it spares not , neither leaves alone
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and if thou fearest treachery from any folk , then throw back to themfairly . lo ! allah loveth not the treacherous .
verily far from hearing are they removed .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months , if they revert , allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
and presently he shall become wellpleased .
give women their dowries freely , but if they willingly forego part of it , then consume it with pleasure and pleasure .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and when we took a promise from you and raised the mount above you , : hold fast to what we have given you and remember what is in it , so that you may be godwary .
say , ‘ tell the truthful ones that allah has sent down to you ; and if they should give the clear message , then you should be patient and do not follow the desires of those who do not believe in our ayat , and who do not believe in the hereafter . ’
until , when the messengers came to the adversity , they have been called a lie . in that case , we shall give the lie to the truth , and then we shall have none to protect our signs .
for solidarity among the quraysh ,
looking towards their lord ;
even if you are eager to guide them , allah does not surely guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
those who lower their voices in the presence of the messenger of allah are those whose hearts allah has tested for piety . for them is forgiveness and a great reward .
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
and if he is of those on the right , –
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
: we feed you only for the sake of allah . we desire no reward from you , nor thanks .
or have they the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? then let them ascend by ropes !
it is god who makes the way for you to recite the point . this is the law of god . he who does the right judgement will receive his judgement . he who has received the judgement of god will have a genuine dwelling .
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires gratitude .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and other faces that day will be dust-stained ,
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
your companion is not mad .
those who believe , jews , sabaeans , and nazarenes whoever believes in allah and the last day and does good , they shall have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
or was he not informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ?
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
he created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom . he is exalted above all that they associate with him .
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
except through a mercy from your lord . indeed his favour to you is great .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
that weighed down your back ?
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we will raise him on the day of resurrection blind . ”
this is hell which the guilty deny .
and remind , for the reminder benefits the believers .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and he fears ,
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are congnisant of it .
you will see every nation hobbling on their knees . each nation will be summoned to its book . this day you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
the evildoers shall have their portion , like the portion of their fellows ; so let them not ask me to hasten on .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
had your lord willed , he could have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in six days ; then allah makes the throne a matter to be established , and it is the same for him to have no protector or friend .
the evil consequences of their deeds overtook them . the wrongdoers among these will also be afflicted by the evil consequences of their deeds . they will be unable to defeat god .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn --
and if they were to be afflicted by any harm , then there came to you the same , and it was the same to the call of allah , and we had made it a portent ; and allah does not love the unjust .
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
we have sent youas a witness and a bearer of glad tidings and warning ,
verily , we sent nuhto his people : warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : 'allah and his messenger promised nothing but delusion '
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
then , when he had equipped them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are indeed thieves !
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
by the much-frequented house ,
then he called upon his lord : these are a people given to sin .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
they said , by god , you are still in your old error .
on thrones decorated ,
the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . a promise binding upon us ; indeed , we will do it .
then paradise is the shelter .
and if those who are unjust are the ones who are the earth , then it is only for the sake of allah to be on the day of resurrection ; and what they do , on the day of resurrection , they will be the giver of punishment from allah , and the punishment of the burning fire .
they will abide therein . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
does man think that he will be left alone to himself , free ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a part of the faithful were reluctant .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
all the time of allah . then , the people who are arrogant , are not the ones who are arrogant . they will not be able to speak to the right way , but will be told , if only allah could show us the way . so will we be rightly guided .
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed yajuj and majuj * are spreading chaos in the land – so shall we assign for you a consideration upon the condition that you set up a wall between us and them ? ”
and allah will give you that which is in your minds to be of the same ; and if the same is the case of the two parties , it is the same . but if the words of maryam is true , the same is the case of the two parties . but if it be the truth of the two parties , he is just one of the parents . but if the truth is to be given to his father , it is the same ; and if the truth is of the mother of maryam ,
is this magic , or do you not see ?
o you who believe ! be conscious of a fire from the people who are the faithful , and the fire of hell , which is ablaze to you . it is only the nemesis of allah , and they are not aware of it .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who receive punishment .
o mankind , a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and allah will increase those who were guided in guidance ; and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for resort .
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
those who have been entrusted to you can say , “ we were not going to be able to say , “ we were not going to be able to say from allah – and if the disbelievers disbelieve , they will say , ‘ are we not going to destroy you ? ’ and then allah will inform those who deny the truth . ”
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
those who speak the reward of allah and his messenger , and make a hole in the land , he will say , ‘ shall be your enemies , so that you shall be consigned to drink . ’ it is expected for them to be a great punishment .
away , away with that you are promised !
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and one of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth , and he is a liar .
by the much-frequented house ,
do not be like those who forgot god , so he made them forget their own souls . it is they who are the sinners .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
and whoever is opposed to allah , be patient , and be dutiful to him ; this is better , for the lord of the book , so that you may be of the losers .
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
we had no authority over you . no , youwere a rebellious lot .
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
they said , ‘ if the wolf devours him , and we are a hardy band , then indeed , we are losers ! ’
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
and from the fruits of date-palms and grapevines , you derive sugar and wholesome food . in this is a sign for people who understand .
and when you are instigated by the example of your women , or is it to be inspired in you , or the way is given to you , or be silent , so that you may be repaid by the means of god 's strength , and remember god 's blessing , and remember the law of god .
and how can you take it back , when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
and whosoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , shall enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
and a barrier will be placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; surely they are in a disquieting doubt .
then from every group we shall draw whichever of them was more defiant towards the all-beneficent .
or do they intend a plot ? but those who defy allah are themselves involved in a plot !
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm god in the least ; god desires not to appoint them a portion in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
as for him who gives and is righteous .
o satisfied soul ,
and be moderatein your walking , and lower your voice . verily , the harshest of all voices is the voiceof the ass .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary . ’
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whom he leads astray -- they are the losers .
to god bow all who are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
dreading some great affliction .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
and if they intend to deceive you , then surely allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
and they urge you to hasten the punishment , and had it not been for a term appointed , the punishment would certainly have come to them . and indeed , it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
soon you will remember what i say to you . i entrust my affair to allah . indeed allah watches his servants . ’
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is sickness said , “ their religion has deluded these people. ” but whoever puts his trust in god—god is mighty and wise .
and by oath of the soul and by oath of him who made it proper .
nay , but we have brought them the truth , and verily , theyare liars .
so be patient , indeed , the promise of allah is true . and whether we show yousome part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
the example of this book is true ; word is true ; word is true ; this is the decree , the decree of your lord , true . what is the matter with your own words , both of them , to whom you have singled out a sound . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
by the snorting chargers , whose hoofs strike against the rocks
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
so they both ate of it , and their nakedness became evident to them , and they started covering themselves with the leaves of the garden . adam disobeyed his lord , and went astray .
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
but as for those in whose hearts is a disease , it will add filth to their filth , and they die as unbelievers .
allah has set forth for them a parable , in accordance with inspiration ; this is the word of one word ; in different ways , it will be different . and this is the guidance of allah , and he guides whom he will , and he is a guide for the sake of allah .
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
woe to you !
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should say against allah that which ye know not
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
the repentant , the worshippers , the praisers , the travelers , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and keep the ordinances of allah .
and the sea set aflame .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
then we facilitated . how well do we calculate !
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
recite : and thy lord is the most generous ,
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father and his people : verily i am quit of that which ye worship .
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god besides him ; otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would assuredly have overcome others . glory be to god , above that they describe !
and he has made the apostle to recite the verses of allah and to those who believe and do righteous deeds , to those who believe and do the right . he will admit them to gardens under which rivers flow , and whoever believes in allah and does the right will be admitted to the gardens through which rivers flow , and for them will be the sustenance of the righteous .
the blind and the sighted are only for the sake of god . he is the sick of your wealth and the wealth , or the wealth of the house or the house of a settlement . or the wealth of the house or the house of the house .
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is informed and observant about his servants .
has the story of the two disputants reached you ? when they climbed over the wall intomihrab .
those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fruitless .
assuredly allah hath succoured you on many fields , andon the day of hunain , when your multitude elated you , but it availed you naught , and the earth , for all its vastness , constrained you , and ye turned back in retreat .
and go thou forth with the wickedness of a boy , unto whom there is no crookedness ; the word is set on account of thy lord : for these are a people who are mujrimun .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
if you ask them , “ who is it that brings down water from the sky , then the earth is given to you ? ” in fact , they will say , “ all the praises and thanks be to allah . in fact , it is no more than a result . in fact , they have no idea . ”
and when we divided the sea for you and saved you and drowned pharaoh 's people before your very eyes .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate .
rejoicing in what allah has bestowed upon them of his bounty , and they rejoice for the sake of those who have not yet joined them , that they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they urge you to hasten the punishment . and indeed , hell will besiege the faithless
nay , buthas not done what he commanded him .
read your scroll ; this day you are sufficient to take your own account .
do they not think that they will be resurrected
in which are written proper affairs .
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . allah is watchful over all things .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught : but mankind wrong themselves .
it is a written record ,
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
then as for him who is inordinate ,
whose clusterswill be within easy reach .
and alsoanotherwhich you love , help from allah and a speedy victory . so give the glad tidings to the believers .
and compassion from us , and goodness . he was pious ,
are there sons for you , and daughters for him ?
when it sees them from a far place , they will hear its bubbling and sighing .
do you not realize that god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose
and he gave you of all that you asked him . if you count allah ’ s blessings , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , very ungrateful .
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
ain sin qaf
there was indeed a sign for sheba in their dwelling-place : two gardens , to the right and to the left : 'eat of your lord 's provision , and give thanks to him , a good land and a lord all-forgiving . '
but those who defy our revelations—these are the people of misery .
and whenever a surah is revealed : believe in allah and strive along with his messenger , the affluent among them ask leave of thee , and say : leave us , that we may be with those who sit .
and we left for themamong later generations :
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
howthey will hear and see the day they come to us , but the wrongdoers today are in manifest error .
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
has the story of abraham 's honoured guests reached you ?
and allah has preferred some of you over others in provision ; so those who are preferred do not give over their provision to their slaves , so that they may be equal therein to their slaves ; so what do they deny ?
standall night , except a little .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and given you drink from it , and you are not its treasurers .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
he who made the earth a habitat for you , and traced in it routes for you ; and sent down water from the sky , with which we bring forth various kinds of vegetation .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right path .
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
we gave the children of israel the book , judgment and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
no word have we sent down for you except that it may be in the presence of allah . but if they are wrongdoers , they will surely have to beg for your sins , and allah is most forgiving , most merciful .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
those who perform as-salatand give zakat and they are certain of the hereafter .
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
so if they belie you , say , “ your lord is possessor of infinite mercy , and his wrath will not be averted from the guilty people . ”
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
when his lord called to him in the holy valley , towa :
but you prefer the present life ;
he struck them with his right hand .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
“ ask the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came . we are being truthful . ”
companions of the left
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
obey god and obey the messenger , and be cautious . if you turn away , know that the duty of our messenger is only to plainly convey the message .
verily those who disbelieve and hinderfrom allah 's way , they have strayed far away .
and remember what is recited in your homes of the revelations of allah and wisdom . indeed allah is all-attentive , all-aware .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket such were the confederates .
they said : o our father ! wherefore thou intrustest us not with yusuf , whereas verily we are his well-wishers .
who creates , then makes complete ,
and recall what time we took a bond from you : shed not the blood of your people nor turnyour people out of your dwellings . then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
and those before them had plotted ; but all plotting is allah 's ; he knows what every soul earns , and the disbelievers will soon realise for whom is the final abode .
surely he knows what is spoken openly and he knows what you conceal .
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will indeed be guided to a straight path .
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
they marveled that a warner has come to them from among them . the disbelievers say , “ this is something strange .
you are not a warden over them ,
whose eyes were covered from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph behind with our things , and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement ?
and when ye call to prayer they take itas mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who understand not .
neither dulling the senses nor intoxicating ,
when they come to you , when they pledged to the believers , they would say , no matter for god . do not consider anything equal to god , nor do you make a partner to him . do not make a breach with god , for god is forgiving and kind .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
so be similar to the point of this book , as a kinship or kill the children of israel , as much as their own murder , so that they may have their property , if god had willed , he could not have done so . so leave them , so they will not be able to do it .
this is god 's creation . show me now what thosebeside him have created . in fact , the wicked are in obvious error .
the righteous shall be those who were afraid of their lord , and those who are on the day of judgment , when the gates of the heavens and the earth will be made to reach the ground as the torah and the close of the angels . they will be admitted to paradise wherein they will live forever .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
and what will make you know what the strikingis ?
as for the likeness of those they say , they are the ones who say : 'here , in the course of the book , that is the book ; that which is the book shall be in the book . that is the law of allah , and they will not be able to invent lies .
so be thou not in doubt concerning that which theseworship . they worship only as their fathers worshipped before : and verily we shall pay them their portion undiminished .
vision comprehends him not , and he comprehendsvision ; and he is the knower of subtleties , the aware .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
and they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has not there come to them the evidence of what was in the former scriptures ?
and placed a blazing lamp ?
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
so be patient , for the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your fault , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before , and you will never find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it as provision for you and for travelers . and hunting is forbidden for you in the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
say , indeed , the earlier ones and the later ones
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish save his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of the dominion of the heavens and the wisdom . thou wilt give whomsoever thou wilt err , so that thou art of the mighty , the wise .
and when allah had made a covenant with the prophets , one of them , he gave the command to what they had said , and when they had told them , “ this messenger of yours , will be a noble messenger , so will you come to believe in me , and allah will say , ‘ do not be deceived by what you used to do . ’
, ask the forgiveness of their sins or ask for your forgiveness . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them , for god does not guide the evil-doers .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
and the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree , uprooted from the earth , possessing no stability .
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
and they used to persist in the great sin .
such are the people against whom the word has proved true among nations of the jinn and the men that have passed away before them . they will belost .
those who believe , and have not confounded their belief with evildoing -- to them belongs the right security ; they are rightly guided .
but god would not punish them while thou wast with them , nor will he punish them while they begged forgiveness .
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
tell my servants , to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability and act according to our station .
indeed , pharaoh exalted himself in the land and divided its people into factions , weakeninga groupamong them , killing their sons and sparing their women . indeed , he was of those who work corruption .
and when he turned his face toward midian , he said , “ perhaps my lord will show me the right path . ”
and made them virgins ,
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
and you see , that you may see the people in this world 's life as well as the means of the life of this world . there is no one of them to say . each one of them will say to it . there is any one of them who can not tell them . god is well aware of what you do .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and the flesh of fowls that they desire .
and as for the qasitun , they shall be firewood for hell ,
o my people , how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
in gardens , questioning
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
is he who walks in the land , so that he may be responsible for it ? is there any sign for them in the least ? or is there a sign in allah , above that they associate with him ?
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
but if you slip after clear arguments have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
as if they were closely guarded pearls .
, ask the forgiveness of their sins or ask for your forgiveness . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them , for god does not guide the evil-doers .
and they will be marshalled before thy lord in ranks : now have ye come to us as we created you the first time . aye ! ye fancied that we had appointed for you no tryst .
what we have revealed to you of the book is the truth , confirming what wasbefore it . god is well-informed of his servants , all-seeing .
and whoever does that in aggression and injustice - soon will we cast him into the fire ; and this is easy for allah .
we never sent before you any messengers , but the messengers ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you as a trial for others . will you have patience ? your lord is always watching .
and we did not show them a sign but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
and thus do we paraphrase the signs variously , lest they should say : you have studied , and that we may make it clear for a people who know .
he created you from out of dust , then he will bring you back on it , then he will bring you a just son , so that you may be guided , in order that you may be guided .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
when the heaven is split asunder
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
to him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whom he will . indeed he has knowledge of all things .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before someone you created from clay ? ’
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
and of the cattle there are some for burden and some for meat ; eat of what allah has provided you and do not follow in satan ’ s footsteps ; he is indeed your manifest enemy .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? aye ! it is the truth from thy lord , that thou mayest warn a people unto whom no warner came before thee , that haply they may be guided .
nor do they spend any expenditure , small or large , nor do they cross a valley , but it is written to their account , so that allah may reward them for their best deeds .
then they shall roast in hell .
gardens and fountains ,
so why did those whom they had chosen as gods besides allah as a means of nearness to them ? indeed , they went astray from them ; and what they used to fabricate was their lie .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
it is indeed a conclusive discourse ,
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
no fatigue will touch them therein , nor will they be expelled from it .
he will teach him the book and wisdom , the torah and the gospel ,
and as for the qasitun , they shall be firewood for hell ,
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been blamed , cast upon the shore .
o ye that are sprung from those whom we carriedwith noah ! lo ! he was a grateful slave .
so be wary of allah and obey me .
though they will be within sight of one another . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
but for the favor of allah i should have surely been among those who were arraigned .
the punishment of those who disbelieve is so the case of the truth is at the hands of god . god has given them victory and piety . god is cognizant of all things .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
no ! there is no refuge !
has there come to you the story of the hosts
that allah may forgive you your shortcomings , whether earlier or later , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
who created the seven heavens one above another . you can see no incongruity in the creation of the beneficent god . look again ! can you see any flaw ?
nor are darkness and light .
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life ;
nay , their hearts are in ignorance of this , and they have otherdeeds , besides , which they are doing .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
when they come to you , they say , we believe . but they have entered with disbelief and they have left with it . god knows best what they were hiding .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that god is severe in retribution .
and fight in the way of allah and know that allah is hearing , knowing .
except the family of lot whom we shall save
from wherever you emerge , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
praise be to god who has revealed to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
who originates creation , then repeats it , and who gives you sustenance from heaven and earth ? is there any ilahwith allah ? say , bring forth your proofs , if you are truthful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and goodly things wherein they rejoiced ;
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
when it is said to them , “ when you have spoken about the matter , or fear , or regret , it will be revealed to you . but if you speak the truth , it will be revealed to the prophet , or there is a sign for the noble messengers . ”
have they not observed the sky above them , how we built and adorned it , leaving no crack ?
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
pharaoh said , did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us .
the life of this world is nothing but diversion and play , and the abode of the hereafter is indeed life , if they but knew .
and i respite them ; surely my scheme is strong .
and the family of fir'awn took him up , that he might become unto them an enemy and a grief . verily fir'awn and haman and their hosts were sinners .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
verily we ! we have sent it down on the night of power .
we have indeed turned about for mankind in this koran every manner of similitude ; yet most men refuse all but unbelief .
the example of this book is true ; word is true ; word is true ; this is the decree , the decree of your lord , true . what is the matter with your own words , both of them , to whom you have singled out a sound . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
say : if the most beneficenthad a son , then i am the first of worshippers .
the dimwit oneamong us has been telling confused lies about god .
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm god in the least ; god desires not to appoint them a portion in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
then he fashioned him in due proportion , and breathed into him something of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little do you thank .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that god is severe in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes forth from it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
and when his lord tested abraham with certain commands , and he fulfilled them . he said , “ i am making you a leader of humanity. ” he said , “ my pledge does not include the wrongdoers . ”
and of some of the wealth are those who are given the property of their hearts , that they shall be made to drink of their houses , and if there be for them a thing of their deeds , my remembrance is indeed ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
god is the true one . it is no more than a confirmation of his knowledge . but as for those who believe , in the least , it is a clear word of god , whether those who believe , or deny the truth , say : 'allah has caused what is true . but he has no guide .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of good things better than the remembrance of my lord , until the horses disappeared from sight . ”
and certainly , you will not seek to do something , nor can they question you . but they will surely be called to account , but they have no faith in the truth . but if they turn away , then they will not be sorry , and allah will punish them in the matter .
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
verily we ! it is we who have revealed the admonition , and verily we are the guardians thereof .
it strips away the scalps .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
none dispute concerning the revelations of allah save those who disbelieve , so let not their going to and fro in the cities deceive thee .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ,
to whoever among you desires to go forward or lag behind .
and the cattle -- he created them for you ; in them is warmth , and uses , and of them you eat .
who deniedand turned away .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
call on your lord humbly and secretly . he does not love the transgressors .
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth , when it reaches them : this is plain magic !
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
he said , “ my lord , i have been charged with respect to them , but if you were to be able to , then do not turn away from them , nor do you make a prey to me . i will make a prison for you .
do you not realize that god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose
tell my servants , to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
allah has made the light light of the heavens and the earth , and the shadows of the light are as the light of the darkness . it is the like of a smoking , in which there is a smoking for the eye . it is the difference of a smoking , and allah has the knowledge of the qur'an .
but speak gently to him , that haply he may be mindful , or perchance fear . '
and the word is revealed to you . so , you are to be brought to account in the presence of what the committed committed before . said to them , ‘ o my people ! be wary of allah , so do you have a reason ! ’
then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ;
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the circulation of the winds , are signs for a people who understand .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
the stars and the trees prostrate themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
moses showed him the great miracle
and the people of noah , when they denied the messengers , we drowned them and made them a sign for mankind ; and we have prepared a painful punishment for the unjust .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
eat and pasture your cattle : verily therein are signs for men of sagacity .
man tireth not of praying for good , but when evil toucheth him , then he is disheartened , desperate .
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , although the disbelievers dislike it .
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of the dominion of the heavens and the wisdom . thou wilt give whomsoever thou wilt err , so that thou art of the mighty , the wise .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
the evildoers shall have their portion , like the portion of their fellows ; so let them not ask me to hasten on .
your word is true . god loves the people who ignore the truth .
indeed , your lord is the best knower of two periods of the two part of the night or the night , or point on the part of the night . it is the difference of the night and the day . it is the tradition of god to make you the night and the day as a result of the law of the night . god is the most forgiving and the most merciful .
they shall be rewarded by their lord , gardens of bliss , wherein they will live forever . they will abide therein forever . these are the people of the right direction .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
so indeed with hardship is ease .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
but he who comes to him with faith and righteous works shall be exalted to high ranks ,
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
and when it is said to them , believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , they themselves are fools , but they do not know .
lo ! verily it is allah 's way unto whom belongeth naught save allah : for those beside him are saying : 'we are only a plain warner , and allah will not judge between them , for allah is the knower of the unbelievers . '
its outcome is with your lord .
we gave him the good news of a prudent boy ;
lo ! verily it is allah 's way unto whom belongeth naught save allah : for those beside him are saying : 'we are only a plain warner , and allah will not judge between them , for allah is the knower of the unbelievers . '
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
say : 'is it other than allah that you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
say , god knows all the secrets of the heavens and the earth . he has the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only guardian of all things .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
what we have revealed to you is a revelation from us . but what we have revealed to you is a clear word , and what is the matter with it , as a guidance and a guide for the straight path .
and of mankind is he whose speech about the life of this world calls you , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the fiercest of opponents .
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
and vie with the others ;
and why should we not believe in allah and in the truth that has come to us , and we yearn for our lord to admit us among the righteous ?
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
o people who believe ! follow the follow of the follow , and do not follow the one who follows the account of the devil ; indeed the devil is the most inclined , and he does not have mercy on the account of allah , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
or do you have a clear authority ?
and is this a favor of which you remind me that you have enslaved the children of israel ?
and when we changecommunication forcommunication , and allah knoweth best what he revealeth -- they say : thou art but a forger , aye ! most of them know not .
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
nay , again , they will come to know !
is he whom we have promised a good promise which he will receive , like him whom we have provided the wares of the life of this world , then on the day of resurrection he will be among those arraigned ?
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
taught man what he did not know .
he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall be transformed ,
the people of pharaoh said to the believers , ‘ shall you be a man of truth , so that he may do it ? ’ he said , ‘ shall you be a companion of that which is manifest to you from your lord ? and if you are truthful , then indeed , i am the clear warner . ’
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
they will say , “ we remained a day , or part of a day ; but ask those who keep count . ”
are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them by night while they are asleep ?
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
and when the human being reaches , then pray to his lord , and then , when he has given them , then , when he is grateful to his lord , he therefore squandered with prayer , and he will say , ‘ a little while , maybe you will be among the truthful . ’
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never fail to fulfill your promise .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
, ask the forgiveness of their sins or ask for your forgiveness . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them , for god does not guide the evil-doers .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path . ”
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you to go back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
but when we removed the plague from them until a term which they should reach , behold ! they broke their word .
say , “ you are about to speak upon the word , or recite it to them . the words of god is too proper to you ; therefore , ask the people of the remembrance , in which is the law of the qur ’ an ; so ask them for a beneficial tone .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat ; and the fire shall be their lodging .
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed ; so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
taste your persecution ! this is what you would hasten on .
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
as if they had never lived there . oh , away with the people of midian , just as the thamud were done away with !
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us and be among its witnesses . ”
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
these are verses of the wise book .
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say : on the day of decision the faith of those who disbelievewill not avail them , nor will they be reprieved .
on honourable pages .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
on her neck shall be a cord of twisted fibre .
he ran away to the laden ship ,
those who love that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
or do they say : a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time !
they say , “ god has forged the falsehoods of god . if he wills , he will bring us a book ; and god desires to destroy the hearts of his prayers ; surely god knows the thoughts within the hearts . ”
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your kinsmen , we would have stoned you . you are not strong to us . ”
and worship your lord until there comes to you that which is certain .
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . god will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear him and will increase their rewards .
o people of the book ! say to the people of the book , ‘ we have been sent to a herald of glad tidings , so that the warner may be shown to them . allah has power over all things . ’
and do not extend your glance toward what we have given tocategories of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life , so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and forgive you , and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
because there came to him the blind man , .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
'lord , ' said mary , 'how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me ? ' said he , 'god creates what he will . ' and when he decrees a thing , he only says to it 'be , ' and it is .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path . ”
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
the matter , to explain to you is all truth , and to make clear to you all things . so , o moses , make the matter clear to you , and teach the people what is the wrong .
but he denied and flouted .
and gardens and fountains .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find better than this as a return .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
and among us are the righteous , and among us arenot so ; we weredivided ways .
if you follow the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and conjecture .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ?
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
to show me the treasures of god . i speak the words of god . i speak the words of god . he is the best knower of what is in their hearts . god is well aware of what is in their hearts .
as theyupon their couches and gaze .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
and we left for him among the later folk :
and the mountains are crumbled , crumbled .
and will admit them to paradise with which he has acquainted them .
by allah , we have sent messengers before you to other nations . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , so he is their patron today , and they will have a painful punishment .
peace be upon noah among all the nations .
how many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have we destroyed before them ?
and thus have we made in every city great ones of its wicked ones , that they may plot therein . but they plot only against themselves , though they do not perceive .
jacob said : nay , but your minds have beguiled you into something.comely patience ! it may be that allah will bring them all unto me . lo ! he is the knower , the wise .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
then i called them openly ,
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose people are servile unto us ?
why , when the word is recited to you , , god is the one god . he has given you the favors before this , and he has given you the favors , if you only see .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : you have tarried according to the decree of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know .
when the knowledge of the book is brought at the hands of god . when the words of god comes true , he received the words of god . what is the matter with the pagans ? god has knowledge of it .
and if you wish to havewife in place of another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it ; will you take it by slanderingandmanifest wrong ?
then their cry , when our punishment came to them , was only that they said , “ we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
the wealth of the everlasting life is a thing of the everlasting life , and do not be just with the worldly life . do not be like the custom of god 's servants . god does not love the unjust people .
so we said , 'smite him with part of it ' ; so god brings the dead to life , and shows you his signs , so that you may understand .
then he will return you into it , and bring you forth .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; therein for them shall be spouses purified , and we shall admit them to deepening shade .
except those who believe and do good works ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
, tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we had given two gardens of vines surrounded by the palm trees with a piece of farm land between them
beholdest thou ? - if we let them enjoy for years .
the dwellers of the desert are the hardest in infidelity and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has sent down to his messenger . and allah is knowing , wise .
and do not extend your glance toward what we have given tocategories of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life , so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
for the living and the dead ?
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
their deception will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
lo ! verily it is allah 's way unto whom belongeth naught save allah : for those beside him are saying : 'we are only a plain warner , and allah will not judge between them , for allah is the knower of the unbelievers . '
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell : thereunto ye shall go down .
the arrogant leaders of the great people were in the land who were afflicting them with the evil ones . they are only guessing in the land except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to set up the tradition of god in the past .
until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer
the word of some of their wives are made to go on their people by their foreheads , spouses , and women . some of them will be greeted by their own words . if they were to leave their property , they would have no one to be blamed . god is majestic and all-wise .
: this is our gift , so bestow thou , or withhold , without reckoning .
that is because allah merges the night into the day , and he merges the day into the night ; and because allah is hearing , seeing .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we shall marry them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
your god is one ,
blessed is he who has placed in the sky great stars and placed therein a lamp and a shining moon .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
we have constantly conveyed them the wordthat they may take heed .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them .
say , “ our lord will bring us together , then he will judge between us equitably , and he is the all-knowing judge . ”
he said : and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ?
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
no calamity befalls except by allah ’ s leave . and whoever believes in allah - he guides his heart , and allah is cognizant of all things .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . indeed , cows look alike to us ; and if allah wills , we will be guided . ”
say : if i err , i err only against my own soul , and if i am guided , it is because of the inspiration of my lord to me . indeed , he is hearing and near .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
allah will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths ; but he will take you to task for that which is intended in your hearts ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
as for those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , and increase in disbelief allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
or have they a stairwayupon which they listen ? then let their listener produce a clear authority .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
is not allah the greatest of the rulers ?
you will die , and they will die .
those , they are the unbelievers , the immoral .
except for a proclamation from allah and his messages . he who disobeys allah and his messenger will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein for a long time .
your lord is best aware of you . if he wills , he will have mercy on you , or if he wills , he will punish you . we have not sent you as their guardian .
so he will be in pleasant living .
if good befalls you , it grieves them , but if hardship befalls you , they say , we took our precautions beforehand , and they turn away rejoicing .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
we have bestowed our favour on you before this
then eased the way for him .
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny itand most of them are disbelievers .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and certainly there came to them a messenger from among them , but they rejected him , so the punishment overtook them while they were unjust .
on thrones , looking .
early morning brought upon them enduring punishment .
say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , those are they who are the losers '
had we revealed it to a nonarab ,
those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children will be better than the way of allah . and they will soon be made to look on the disbelievers .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
a book of which the verses are made plain , an arabic quran for a people who know .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
gardens and fountains ,
and if they behold a sign , they turn away and say : prolonged illusion .
and the sun and the moon are made to light in order to reach the sun , and to the light which is right ; and what is just like a confirmation of what is right . and fear allah , that you may be al-muttaqun .
recite : and thy lord is the most generous ,
if they had wished to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their being averse , so he held them back , and it was said : sit ye with those who sit back .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a humble fluid .
he promiseth them and stirreth up desires in them , and satan promiseth them only to beguile .
a little enjoyment , then their refuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
on the day when he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , in secret and in public , their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
our lord ! we believe in what thou hast sent down and we follow the apostle ; so write us down with those who bear witness .
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then return to him for a time . then , when we give good counsel to him , he will give them the good news of a great day .
when moses came to the point of the house , follow what is revealed to you . tell them , what is the matter with you . tell them , god 's word is true . so when he decides to do so , he will also say : 'this is what you have been promised '
those who were proud will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who prevented you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you yourselves were criminals .
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
and those who emigrated in the way of allah and then were slain or died , allah will surely provide them with a goodly provision ; and indeed allah is the best of providers .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
and made therein mountains standing firm , lofty , and given you to drink sweet water ?
and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , they would not have been able to say . indeed , it was they who have no knowledge of it . and allah is the exalted in might , the owner of bounties .
and it is he who has given you the scripture , at the setting of the mercy upon it ; so we shall give it up to a new language , so that it will be a dead , and we will bring forth to it a dead land , so that they may take heed .
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
and the duty of his people is just a perfect command ; and only the extent of its deeds is only for his own good , and the only decision is for his own good ; “ our lord , do not let us be a prey to the right way ; and our lord , do not have mercy upon us , except as you have been doing ; and do not be among the skeptics . ”
and in your creation , and in the crawling things that he scattereth in the earth , are portents for a people who have faith .
and ease my task for me ;
and it is he who has given you the scripture , at the setting of the mercy upon it ; so we shall give it up to a new language , so that it will be a dead , and we will bring forth to it a dead land , so that they may take heed .
and when they are at the across the sea , then leave them as the mountains , as if they were the mountains , so call upon allah , and when they are upon a barrier , he will call them to utter aversion . and ever is he to whom they are the truthful .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and saved them and their people from the great distress ,
tidings containing a deterrent have come to them
and every time i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves up with their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
there is no duty on the example of the women of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter or the likeness of the daughter of the daughter of the living , or the one on the barren . god 's word is to be fulfilled ; but do not be subject to the truth . god is most forgiving and most forbearing .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
we created them , and we strengthened their joints , and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
he said : he says : a heifer not trained to till the soil or the fields ; sound and without blemish . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . so they said : now thou bringest the truth !
he said : o musa ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
god has begotten children . they are liars .
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear mandate .
and weigh with a balance straight .
do they not reflect on themselves ? god created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a stated term ; yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
with the will of those who have been given the book , they will say , “ in fact , your own plan is , ” in fact , they have been saying , “ in fact , ” in fact , we have made their own people to be the people of the book , to whom you have been threatening . the punishment of the unbelievers has already been decided .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and a curse followed them in the world , and on the day of resurrection ; what a wretched gift is the gift .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying peace be on you : enter the garden for what you did .
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they will not believe !
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except whomever allah wills ; then it will be blown again , and they will be standing , looking on .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
which hurled people around like uprooted trunks of palm-trees .
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
they would still say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
so the evil results of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance among us , we would have been guided by the right course ; therefore i shall keep it on account of the qur ’ an , so that it is we who are the giver . ”
so we made a command of our own to the believers under our sway ; so when we inspired the command , be in truth . so , as to what we had spoken , is also the same . so , it is a command .
those who remember god , standing , sitting , and on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : lord , thou hast not created this in vain . glory be to thee ! guard us against the chastisement of the fire .
and aad and thamood , it has become clear to you from their dwellings . satan made their deeds seem fair to them and prevented them from the path , though they were endowed with perception .
then it will be for us to call them to account .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , a muslim , and he was not of the idolaters .
o people of the book ! why do you confound the truth with falsehood and conceal the truth while you know ?
had allah wished to take to himself a son , he could have chosen whom he pleased out of what he creates . glory be to him ! he is allah , the one , the irresistible .
we have sent you with the truth to proclaim good news and to warn . never has there been a nation but a warner has passed in it .
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
we created them not save with a purpose , but most of them know not .
he said , ‘ so it is . your lord will say , ‘ it is easy for me , and we will make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecided . ’
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god besides god , or you will be thrown into hell , rebuked and banished .
do you not see those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
he has given you flocks and sons ,
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who have faith .
the book has come to you of the book , when it has been revealed to you , ‘ when you recite the truth , allah ’ s precedent is with the people of this book , and indeed allah will bring forth the faithless as the faithless . ’
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah will perfect his light , although the disbelievers dislike it .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the others .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before someone you created from clay ? ’
and what you do not see
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
fill your bellies with it ,
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
and preferred the life of this world ,
eschew all sin , open or secret : those who commit sin will get due recompense for their earnings .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with it , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you hoarded up for yourselves . ”
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they call upon beside him ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god did not avail them when your lord 's command came , and they added to them nothing but destruction .
and , when the matter is set at hand , the wardens of it is true . when he saw it , he said : ' o people , behold ! this is a word of peace . and allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
this is but a fable of the men of old ,
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
has the story of moses been given to you , the people of moses ? the people of the book are only aware of their own selves . the people who have submitted themselves to god will certainly have no knowledge about it . they have the right to do so .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
say : o mankind ! indeed i am a messenger of allah unto you , and unto you is the dominion of the heavens and the earth : there is no god but he , the lord of the worlds ; so follow him , and that ye may follow the right way :
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs . then they would not find any protector or helper .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you ; and none accept guidance except those who incline .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
.
a spring therein named salsabeel .
those to whom the people said , “ the people have gathered against you , so fear them ” , but it increased them in faith , and they said , “ allah is sufficient for us ; and he is the best trustee . ”
by no means ! he was stubborn towards our revelations .
and the ten nights ,
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
did you think that we had created you in jest , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
allah has set forth the example of the people of noah and the people of lot to the unbelievers who had become two of the faithless . they were both of the same for the unbelievers . they will be told , enter the fire which will be the home of hell .
moses said : say youabout the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor forbid those who received the book , from among those who received the book , until they pay the tribute , from among those who were given the book .
they said : o our father ! ask forgiveness of our sins for us ; verily we have been sinners .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
had allah known any good in them , he would have made them hear ; and had he made them hear , they would have turned away , averse .
no way is there for you . it is not in the least to be a trial for those who have faith . in fact , the good way is a manifest opinion of the truth . and whoever does not accept faith in allah , the record of him is the overpowering .
but if you are about to know about what we have given you , then ask the people of the children of israel in the matter . indeed , it is the truth from your lord , so do not be in the least as a lesson .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
those who have faith and do righteous deeds—happy are they and good is theirdestination .
then from every group we shall draw whichever of them was more defiant towards the all-beneficent .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
which guides to the right path . we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
allah it is who hath created seven heavens in harmony , and allah 's command , and the command of allah , in order that they may be of the land , and may know that allah hath power over all things .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . as for such , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
do not implicate god in your oaths to avoid doing good , being pious and keeping peace between people , for god hears all and knows everything .
it is the laws of god . in truth , we speak to you . be loud , then , as to your footsteps , o people of the book , what is the matter with you , o people of understanding ? god 's command is not .
the romans have been defeated
and let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
but those who strive against our signs to void them -- they shall be the inhabitants of hell .
we established you in the earth and made in it means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
we have sent you forth as a bearer of glad news and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
cursed were the people of the ditch .
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
or have they taken gods from the earth who raise the dead ?
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember god but little ,
and they say : allah hath taken unto himself a son . hallowed be he ! aye ! unto him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth ; all are obedient unto him .
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
they said , ‘ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
when two parties among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
god replied , i am sending it to you , but whoever of you disbelieves afterwards , i will punish him with a punishment such as i have not meted out to anyone else in the whole world .
so wait patiently for the command of your lord and do not obey any sinner or ingrate among them .
'nor a single friend to feel .
hinderer of good , transgressor , doubter ,
and the sun runs on to a term appointed for it ; that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and also in the way of allah , is as the means of allah ; so he is the most honourable , the most honourable ; and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
and they persecuted them for naught save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
and some of them will confront the others ,
theslaves of the beneficent are they who walk upon the earth modestly , and when the ignorant address them , they say : peace .
those who believe , jews , nazarenes and sabaeans whoever believes in allah and the last day and does good deeds shall be rewarded by their lord ; they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
we shall save your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . many people are heedless of our signs .
say : travel in the land and see how was the end of the guilty .
and among men there is such a one that disputes concerning allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil ,
for every nation there is an appointed time ; then when their term is come they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
and those who are fearful of their lord 's doom -
away , away with that you are promised !
and densely-planted gardens ,
that was because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said , ‘ will humans be our guides ? ’ so they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was free of need ; and allah is free of need and praiseworthy .
he said , 'god will bring you it , if he will , and you will not be able to frustrate him .
and indeed those before them denied , then howwas my reproach .
know that allah revives the earth after it becomes lifeless . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book and thereafter we sent unto musa , and afterward sent down unto musa the signs and a manifest argument . what , then , when we have sent unto thee a revelation of the evidences , is then the followers of the stiff-necked .
receiving what their lord has given them . they were virtuous before this .
and there is a tree in which the sky is sent down , and the tree of its lord ’ s command. is the shameful ; and this is how we explain the signs for a people who are wise .
when they had both submitted , and he had laid him down on his forehead ,
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
from wherever you emerge , turn your face towards the sacred mosque . this is the truth from your lord . god is not heedless of what you do .
and make denial thereof your livelihood ?
o you who believe ! when you consult the messenger , offer something in charity before your consultation . that is better for you and purer . but if you do not find anything , then allah is forgiving , merciful .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when hosts came against you , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
and the judgement shall surely happen .
who believe in the signs of their lord ,
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
have you not seen those to whom a portion of the book was given believing injibt and taghout and say to those who disbelieve : these are better guided on the way than the believers .
and the fifth time , that the curse of allah be upon him , if he should be of the liars .
andhorses , mules , and donkeys , for you to ride and as an adornment ; and he creates what you do not know .
it is a burning fire .
and of the people of the scripture there is a community that is not better , but if they are given the truth , they are not the ones who deny the truth after it has come to them , and if they are given the truth , then allah will bring it to naught ; and allah is able to do all things .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . so i prolonged enjoyment for the disbelievers ; then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
and we brought the others close to that place .
allah is he who created you and then sustained you , then makes you die , then brings you back to life . can any of your idols do any of that ? exalted is he above what they associate .
they said : we are lords of might and lords of great prowess , but it is for thee to command ; so consider what thou wilt command .
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
and do not make the property of your property to be a test except by the leave of god , and do not even give up its measure , unless it be in a finished , and we will give you a complete measure . so that you may be given the law of god , the true one , that you may receive admonition .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
this is a blessed reminder that we have revealed to you . will you then deny it ?
o believers , advance not before god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and defame your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their oaths are nothing – so that they may desist .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command ; surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
and set thy face to the religion , a man of pure faith , and be thou not of the idolaters .
and help you with surpassing help .
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
and during the night prostrate to him and exalt him a longnight .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys allah and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
and keep vigil in part of the night as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a laudable station .
verily we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon : and unto us they shall be returned .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
nor does he speak out of desire .
o messenger , convey what is sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god protects you from the people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
and preferred the life of this world ,
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a guilty people .
except through a mercy from your lord . indeed his favour to you is great .
or he combines them males and females , and makes sterile whomever he wishes . indeed , he is knowing and competent .
so tread thou the straight path as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not . lo ! he is seer of what ye do .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
so when you are free work diligently ,
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe penalty would have reached you for what you took .
he said : lookest thou ! when we betook ourselves to the rock , then i forgot the fish ; and naught but satan made me forget to mention it , and it took its way into the sea a marvel .
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
indeed , what you are promised is true .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what ismost gracious ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which thou commandest us ? and it increases them in aversion .
and see ; soon they shall see !
hast thou seen him who disbelieveth in our revelations and saith : surely i shall be given wealth and children .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud !
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
they said : we will by no means cease to be assiduous to it until moses returns to us .
those who spend their wealth by night and day , in secret and in public , their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
he thought and analyzed .
from which you are turning away .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if you have sense .
and by oath of the soul and by oath of him who made it proper .
then , to allah belongspraise - lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
and preferred the life of this world ,
we had certainly tried those who were before them , and allah will surely know those who are truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
and raised couches .
then do not place me , lord , with the wrongdoers .
so be patient , for the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your fault , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will cause you to die , and most surely man is ungrateful .
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the wicked .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it . he said , “ did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers ? you have done something awful . ”
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so get away from me for a while . ”
in it is a flowing spring
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed , we have directed to you the way of allah before you , and fear allah ; and allah is the absolute , the owner of all praise .
if he wills , he stills the wind , then they would remain motionless on its surface . indeed in that are signs for every patient , grateful person .
did you ) not seehow your lord dealt with 'ad ?
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
he set outon an expedition ,
and protect them from the evil consequences . and whoever you protect from evil deeds , on that day , you will have had mercy upon him , and that is the supreme success .
praise isto allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
he said , “ this land is forbidden to them for forty years , and they will wander aimlessly in the land . so do not grieve over the defiant people . ”
as a reminder—we are never unjust .
who , out of his bounty , has lodged us in an abode wherein no toil nor weariness affects us .
among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
and rich carpets levelled out .
and whoever invokes besides allah another god of which he has no proof , his reckoning is only with his lord ; indeed the disbelievers will not succeed .
do you not see that they wander about bewildered in every valley ?
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do .
the people of the book are the ones who have received the book . it has been revealed to you what has been revealed to you . they are the people of the whole book . say , i am commanded to worship god and to him you will all return .
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were napping .
accursed be the conjecturers
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
believers , do not make friends with those who have suffered the wrath of god . they have despaired of the hereafter , just as the unbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
indeed the pious will drink from a cup seasoned with kafur ,
those who believe , jews , nazarenes and sabaeans whoever believes in allah and the last day and does good deeds shall be rewarded by their lord ; they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good ,
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ begone ! whoever of them follows you—hell is your reward , an ample reward . ”
and when hurt toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
in gardens and springs ,
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
they say : if we return to al-madinah , the mighty will surely expel therefrom the meaner . but honour belongs to allah and his apostle and to the believers , but the hypocrites know not .
but those who fear their lord , for them are lofty halls with lofty halls above them , built , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
had your lord willed , he could have made mankind one nation , but they continue to differ .
your lord gives abundantly to whom he will and sparingly to whom he pleases . he is informed and observant about his servants .
you did not read any scripture before it , nor did you write it down with your right hand ; otherwise the falsifiers would have doubted .
he said , “ you know well that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers ; and i think that you , o pharaoh , are doomed . ”
i created the jinn and mankind only so that they might worship me .
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
and say , “ my lord , land me with a blessed landing , and you are the best to accommodate . ”
do they not look at the angels , except for the angels to whom the angels have been sent down ? of the signs of your lord , he will surely have the right to believe , and say , “ wait , the day of the judgement of your lord , if you have faith . ”
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
they wish that you should be pliant so theywould be pliant .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
: o john ! hold fast the book . and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
he struck them with his right hand .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you nations and tribes so that you may recognise each other . he who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
leave me alone with he whom i created
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
we have sent down revelations clearly showing the truth . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
and those who put the day for the first time , and said : o woe to me ! o my people ! it is as the fact that allah has bestowed his bounty on whom he will . and indeed , we have the power to take the right course of the truth , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
alif . lam . mim . ra . these are the verses of the book . whatever is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , but most people do not believe .
and he it is who sendeth down the rain after they have despaired , and spreadeth abroad his mercy . and he is the patron , the praiseworthy .
in a lofty garden ,
pharaoh said , did we not bring you up among us as a child ? and you spent many years of your life among us .
or askest thou them for a wage , and so they are weighed down with debt ?
concerning the guilty :
it spares not , neither leaves alone
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say , indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
in which are high thrones .
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
those who consume the property of orphans wrongfully , only consume fire in their bellies , and they will roast in a blaze .
you are only one one of our own . we have given you all our revelations , and we have given them their views . the matter is revealed to you . what you had done is true .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
and the mountains will move with a visible movement .
eschew all sin , open or secret : those who commit sin will get due recompense for their earnings .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
o people , listen to the truth , indeed , those whom you invoke besides allah can not listen to any one . if they do so , they will be able to do so . and they will be unable to speak .
those to whom we have given the book follow it as it ought to be read . they believe in it . those who reject it—these are the losers .
except boiling water , and freezing hail .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
and he said to the one he thought would be saved , ‘ mention me to your master. ’ but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
then let the people of the garden get modest , so that god may seek his bounty to the unbelievers , but they will not be able to escape from it , and those who are willing to do what god has given them is the source of what they have done .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and in your animals is the wives of the date-palm and the earth , in pairs of date palms , and grapevines . in the same way , you have no doubt .
until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer
o you who have believed , let neither your possessions nor your children distract you from the remembrance of allah . whoever does that—it is they who are the losers .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped to drive you out of your homes . and whoever makes friends with them , then those are the wrongdoers .
only the saying 'peace , peace ! '
when it is said to them : 'believe in that which is sent down to us ' they reply : 'we believe in that which is sent down to us , and they will not believe . ' say : 'then why should you not be the truthful ones ?
by god , i shall have a plan for your statues after you have gone away and turned your backs .
and hisis the majesty in the heavens and the earth , and he is the all-mighty , the all-wise .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and they say : whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and for our women ; but if it is stillborn , they both partake of it . he will recompense them for their describing . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they will abide . that is the supreme triumph .
until when they came to the valley of the ants , an ant said : o ants ! enter your dwellings , lest solomon and his hosts crush you , unperceiving .
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant toward the doors of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
and we shall remove from their breasts any lurking sense of injury : brothersfacing each other on thrones .
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
and grudgingwhen good comes his way
and who guard their private parts
and verily , loutwas one of the messengers .
he then sneaked upon their deities and said , “ do you not eat ? ”
and ward offthe fire prepared for disbelievers .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
but it will be only a single nudge .
we descend not except by the command of your lord . to him belongs all that is before us and all that is behind us , and all that is in between . your lord is not forgetful .
furthermore i call to witness the setting of the stars , -
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
o you who believe ! seek help through patience and prayer ; surely allah is with the steadfast .
and strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said , our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; we will not call upon any god besides him , for then we would have spoken an outrage .
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
o people , you have been born on the day of your lord when he has begotten a son . the words of god will not be able to make a son . the promise of god is true . so do not let the torment of the hereafter deceive you .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of god , if you believe in god and the last day . let their punishment be witnessed by a party of believers .
and to recite the qur'an . and whosoever goeth right , receiveth guidance for his own soul , and whosoever goes astray , say : i am only a warner .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o prophet , urge the believers to fight . if there are twenty among you patient , they will overcome two hundred , and if there are a hundred , they will overcome a thousand unbelievers , for they are a people who do not understand .
and then severed his life-artery ,
and we sent moses with our signs and a clear mandate .
and firaun , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
say : o people of the book ! why do you reject the signs of allah when allah is witness to all that you do ?
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
and his mother , to the throne , to the throne he supreme ; and they chose him , and he said , ‘ my father ! ‘ my father ! indeed , it is the speech that you have been doing . indeed , my lord is the best of what i have been doing . indeed , he is the knowing , the wise .
as for the likeness of those who have been kind of knowledge , the like of what they have been concealing before , - it is the same , - in order to make a strong plan between you and them . so , as much as a few of them , in order to make a strong plan , god will bring about it all that he has done in the differences .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and whatever is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak to him .
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
remind , if the reminder can be of benefit .
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you , when he made prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the 'alamin . ’
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently bear whatever visits them , and who establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them .
and whoever of them should say : surely i am a god besides him , such a one we should recompense with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
assuredly allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which they proclaim . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
they said : by allah ! assuredly allah hath preferred thee above us , and we were indeed guilty .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
falsehood can not reach it from any direction . it is a revelation from the all-wise , praiseworthy one .
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
they said , burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever as a reward for their deeds .
so remember me , i will remember you . be thankful to me and do not be ungrateful .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
from pharaoh . lo ! he was a tyrant of the wanton ones .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is possessor of forgiveness , and possessor of painful repayment .
and in their wealth there was a share for the beggar and the deprived .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
say : it is only inspired in me that your god is one god . will you then submit to him ?
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those not guided .
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
indeed , we have given you , , a clear conquest
these are they who buy error for guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , and they were not guided .
then we fulfilled our promise to them , and we saved them and those whom we willed , and destroyed the transgressors .
when the angels said , 'mary , god gives thee good tidings of a word from him whose name is messiah , jesus , son of mary , illustrious in this world and the next , and one of those brought near .
indeed , the fire is of the greatest
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and let those fearwho if they left behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them . so let them fear allah and speak words of appropriate justice .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
then musathrew his stick , and behold , it swallowed up all the falsehoods which they showed !
there is a ban on the contrary after this , no more than the torah that he has made . to each other is the result of their deeds . if they had thought , they would surely have to go back to each other .
o people who believe ! when you come to the point of a war , they are quite waiting to you , and to dispute about you , and allah is the best knower of that which is spoken to you . then , if you are true to them , then do not be a pagan .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and in your animals is the wives of the date-palm and the earth , in pairs of date palms , and grapevines . in the same way , you have no doubt .
i am commanded to worship the lord of this city , who made it sacred , and to whomall things ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
or do those who do evil deeds think they can outrun us ? evil is their judgment !
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
but you prefer the present life ;
god is the true one . it is no more than a confirmation of his knowledge . but as for those who believe , in the least , it is a clear word of god , whether those who believe , or deny the truth , say : 'allah has caused what is true . but he has no guide .
so hallow thou the praise of thy lord , and be thou of the prostrate .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
but those who cry lies to him -- so they cried lies , and they said : we have heard a word . so say , the word is not at the command of god . so say : 'no , god has no authority . ' no , they are rightly guided .
this is god 's creation . show me now what thosebeside him have created . in fact , the wicked are in obvious error .
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we will surely taste .
it is due to the poor refugees who have been driven out from their homes and their possessions , seeking the favor of god and his approval . they are the loyal .
and the astray follow the poets .
therefore settle your plan , and come forward in ranks ; indeed whoever dominates this day has succeeded .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
he said : be thatbetween me and thee : whichever of the two terms i fulfil , there shall be no injustice to me ; and allah is a witness over what we say .
and before them , the people of noah , for it is they who weremore unjust and oppressing .
among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
proceed toward the triple-forked shadow ,
and what will make you know what the strikingis ?
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
and we used to talk falsehoodwith vain talkers .
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
and recall what time we have revealed a word unto thee , that thou mayest listen unto them , and that ye may listen to the truth , when it is said unto them : listen unto the people of the stiff-necked , when it hath been revealed unto them .
and we sent not down against his people after him a host from heaven , nor do we ever send .
for the day of judgement .
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , we will surely remove from them their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him . but when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of god , he disowned him . abraham was kind and clement .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people : verily , i am a plain warner to you .
nay ! obey him not , and fall prostrate and draw nigh .
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
throw down what is in your right hand . it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trickery . a magician will never succeed , wherever he may come .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for them all .
i am only a plain warner .
which he let loose upon them for seven nights and eight days in succession , so that thou mightest have seen men lying overthrown , as they were hollow trunks of palm-trees .
which none can touch except the purified .
if they had so willed , they would have deserved the case of the people . they will be brought by the people of paradise to be given a share of the truth . if they do so , we shall certainly have no share of it .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in the former and in the latter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the land twice , and you will ascend exceeding high . '
and for each of them we put forward examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
and if thou fearest treachery from any folk , then throw back to themfairly . lo ! allah loveth not the treacherous .
a fitting recompense .
they have made their oaths a shield , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the lost .
no calamity befalls except by allah ’ s leave . and whoever believes in allah - he guides his heart , and allah is cognizant of all things .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
and scatterfar and wide ;
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , a succession of clear signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
whoever submits his face to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . with god rests the outcome of all events .
tell my servants , to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
and by those who glide along ,
and whoever does allah , then guide his guidance , and whoever follows the right way – so you will not find any one except him ; and the fire is their destination . and the fire is their destination .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
wherefore we let loose upon them a raging wind in days of evil days , that we might make them taste the torment of humiliation in the life of the world ; and verily the doom of the hereafter will be more shameful , and they will not be succoured .
and the magicians came to pharaoh and said : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
see how they strike examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find the right way .
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
he said : worship ye that which ye yourselves do carve
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
eschew all sin , open or secret : those who commit sin will get due recompense for their earnings .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
say , ‘ who is a fool between the two , who has been given to you the sound of the prophet ? ’ who is the best of the polytheists , who has been given clear verses in the hereafter ? and it is in the hereafter that we explain our verses to a people who know .
then she brought him to her people , carrying him . they said , o mary , you have committed a monstrous thing .
he has created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky and then brought out of heaven water , and produced gardens with it . then , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with the lord ? in fact , the people are rightly guided .
and they say what they do not do ?
indeed , the messengers before you had denied , but they came to them on account of their faith . so they will be given guidance until they have no faith in it . and we will certainly tell them of the book of clear evidence .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
it is he who originates and repeats .
that is because they followed that which angereth allah , and hated that which pleaseth him . therefor he hath made their actions vain .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , “ the windfalls are for god and the messenger . so fear god , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ”
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
he said , “ you will not be able to patiently stay with me . ”
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and what they had invented will abandon them .
a building that is a spring , which is written to the disbelievers , a dispute between the disbelievers and the disbelievers in the matter for the disbelievers and god and his messenger . god testifies that they are liars .
but for the favor of allah i should have surely been among those who were arraigned .
and were it not that mankind would become one community , we would have made for those who disbelieve in the most gracious , roofs of silver for their houses , and stairs toclimb ,
the god of mankind ,
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
allah has made the promise of those who have believed and done righteous deeds to the right way . he will surely show them their deeds in the land , and will make the end of the deniers of the truth . and they will have no fear .
is it the laws of wisdom , the true one , the one who believes in god and the last day , which is true , and is not equal to god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and treasures and a station noble .
or , build a direction of the mother where the heavens are given to the heavens , or the high heavens , or the sky , in which the sky will be raised , so say , ‘ immaculate is my lord ! ’ say , ‘ immaculate is my lord ! ’
for you therein is much fruit from which you will eat .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
behold , it is one of their fabrications that they say :
today we shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to us , and their feet will bear witness to what they used to earn .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kindness .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
by the vault raised high ,
who hath ordained laws . and granted guidance ,
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at !
so he prayed to his lord , “ i am overpowered , therefore avenge me . ”
and made several preparations for him .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
the unjust will see that they are made to enter the wrong of their deeds while they are righteously and the righteously striving believers will receive from their lord . this is the greatest victory .
o you who believe ! be conscious of a fire from the people who are the faithful , and the fire of hell , which is ablaze to you . it is only the nemesis of allah , and they are not aware of it .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what allah has given them in his largesse . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those who will be driven headlong into hell will have a terrible dwelling , and they have gone astray from the path .
and if you see them when they are made to stand before the fire , they will say , “ if only we could be sent back , and not deny the signs of our lord , and be among the faithful . ”
and who are givers of poor-rate ,
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
“ o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah ’ s mercy ; indeed none despairs of allah ’ s mercy except the faithless . ”
have they been created by nothing , or are they their own creators ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
ask them , which of them will guarantee that !
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
say : tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what other god besides allah can bring you light ? will you not then hear ?
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
and say , “ we have accepted faith in allah and his noble messenger and the ishaq and the ishaq and the ishaq and the ishaque and the descendants of jacob , and the tauratand their lord , and the injeel , from their lord ; and we are only muslims .
they said , “ o moosa ! in it there are tyrannical people ; we will not enter it until they leave it ; but if they leave , then we will enter . ”
the charitable men and charitable women , who have loaned god a loan of righteousness—it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a generous reward .
those who commit unlawful sexual intercourse from among your women , take the evidence of four witnesses against them ; and if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for them someway .
and nothing prevented people from believing when the guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
they ask you to tell them , ‘ is it true ? ’ say , ‘ yes ! by my lord , it is true , and you can not frustrate it . ’
say , “ what ! i do not worship god , the lord of all being , the lord of all the worlds ? he does not have any injustice except of his own soul ; then to your lord you will all return . ”
those who believe , jews , nazarenes and sabaeans whoever believes in allah and the last day and does good deeds shall be rewarded by their lord ; they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they said , “ put him off , and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
lord , grant me a righteous son .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will surely crucify you all .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
he said : put me in charge of the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
we shall show them our signs in the universe and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is a witness over all things ?
say , ‘ who is a fool between the two , who has been given to you the sound of the prophet ? ’ who is the best of the polytheists , who has been given clear verses in the hereafter ? and it is in the hereafter that we explain our verses to a people who know .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
as for the boy , his parents were faithful , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and they say : the most beneficenthas begotten a son ! hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
indeed , the religion of allah is only with allah , and those who are true in the presence of allah are only with whom the knowledge of their own people have not any without knowledge . so he who believes in allah and does not accept faith in his signs , allah is the watchful over them .
cleaving , as one , the centre ,
and saved them and their people from the great distress ,
thisand surely , allah weakens the deceitful plots of the disbelievers .
and when it is said to them , “ spend out of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed , if he willed ? you are in clear error . ”
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
ta sin . these are verses from the quran , a book that makes things clear ;
and when his lord tested abraham with certain commands , and he fulfilled them . he said , “ i am making you a leader of humanity. ” he said , “ my pledge does not include the wrongdoers . ”
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
by the heaven full of paths .
and stop them there for questioning :
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
with goblets and ewers and a cup of a clear wine ,
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
but he who does deeds of righteousness , being a believer , shall fear neither wrong nor injustice .
and even scals we appointed unto every prophet an enemy from among the culprits ; and thine lord sufficeth as guide and helper .
then he looked ;
turn to him , and fear him , and be steadfast in prayer , and do not be of the idolaters ,
those who take disbelievers for allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
and they will say , “ praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit this land , so that we may dwell in paradise wherever we will . how excellent is the reward of the workers ! ”
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
on the day when we will ask hell , “ are you full ? ” and it will answer , “ are there any more ? ”
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than what they hoard .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
so be on the end of what you have called , as if any will be called to account in the same way .
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention , so that you may receive mercy .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
and indeed he is ardent for the love of good .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
when his lord called to him in the holy valley , towa :
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of those we created .
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and give up what remainethfrom usury , if ye arebelievers .
and by the dawn when it breathes
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
if they had wished to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their being averse , so he held them back , and it was said : sit ye with those who sit back .
when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins testify against them as to what they did .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
and those who followed will say : if only we had another chance , we would have denounced our leaders . thus will allah show them their deeds as regrets for them . and they will never emerge from the fire .
he said , “ no ; my lord is with me ; he will guide me . ”
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember god but little ,
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the doers of good .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
we never sent a messenger before you without instructing him that there is no god but i , so worship me .
it is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they are the greatest losers .
however , those who turn away and disbelieve ,
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
recite to them the parable of the life of this world : like the water we send down from the sky , and the vegetation of the earth becomes green . then it becomes chaff , scattered . and allah is able to do all things .
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of those before them . they disbelieved in the signs of allah and so allah seized them for their sins . indeed , allah is powerful and severe in penalty .
o you who have believed , let neither your possessions nor your children distract you from the remembrance of allah . whoever does that—it is they who are the losers .
for every nation there is a direction to which they face . so race togood . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and other faces that day will be dust-stained ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
and go thou forth with the wickedness of a boy , unto whom there is no crookedness ; the word is set on account of thy lord : for these are a people who are mujrimun .
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
o ye who believe ! be not as those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said ; and he was high in the sight of allah .
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find no protector for you .
and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , they would not have been able to say . indeed , it was they who have no knowledge of it . and allah is the exalted in might , the owner of bounties .
we revealed to you the quran , in order that you may judge between people with the truth , and that god may bring about the people a true guidance , so that god may bring about the people a true place .
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
the revelation of the bookis from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
when they entered upon him , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ we are indeed afraid of you . ’
so be watchful , they too are watching .
o my people , tell me , if you saw what you have seen on the jurisprudence of my lord , and i have found a provision from my lord , and i will not be able to make you a right direction . but , in fact , i will not be able to make a mistake .
and the heaven ! he hath elevated it , and he hath set the balance .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if any one is in your heart , he will show you what is in your hearts . he forgives whom he wills and has power over all things .
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ expel lot ’ s family from your town . they are indeed a puritanical lot . ’
then we drowned the rest thereafter .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
o my people , who would help me against god if i drive you away ?
say : then bring a book from allah which is a better guide than these two , and i will follow it , if you are truthful .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike a dry path for them through the sea , without fear of being overtakenand withoutfear .
it is not a thing for amusement .
the people of the book are the ones who have received the book . it has been revealed to you what has been revealed to you . they are the people of the whole book . say , i am commanded to worship god and to him you will all return .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
and they will say , “ praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit this land , so that we may dwell in paradise wherever we will . how excellent is the reward of the workers ! ”
and the people of the ra , - they are not at all of you , and take them in place of mockery , or turn away from it . indeed , it is the word of their adversaries , even though they are the people of understanding .
recite in the light of the book where it is made clear , with the difference of the night , with the wisdom ; in the ways of god , he will not guide the commandments .
and recall what time we took a bond from you : shed not the blood of your people nor turnyour people out of your dwellings . then ye ratifiedand ye were witnesses .
the arrogant leaders of the great people were in the land who were afflicting them with the evil ones . they are only guessing in the land except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to set up the tradition of god in the past .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully compensate them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
so he made it a tale of sound , and said : o my lord ! grant me the loss of the night , so be given thanks to me , and give thanks to me , and be grateful to me , and that you may be of the righteous .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
but those who defy our revelations—these are the people of misery .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
we created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days , and no fatigue touched us .
what is the matter with you that you speak not ?
or askest thou them for a wage , and so they are weighed down with debt ?
and when the human being reaches , then pray to his lord , and then , when he has given them , then , when he is grateful to his lord , he therefore squandered with prayer , and he will say , ‘ a little while , maybe you will be among the truthful . ’
save him on whom allah hath mercy . lo ! he is the mighty , the merciful .
but when he came to them with clear signs , clear proofs have come to them from us . they said , ‘ o mary , give us a son that confirms our message , but be a polytheist . ’
does he think that no one sees him ?
verily , before that , they indulged in luxury ,
andabraham , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our verses .
the believers , , do not take the believers in place of their allies and have taken the believers as friends . as for the believers , they will be responsible for their own souls . but god does not guide you . to god will all of you return .
the word has certainly become due against most of them , so they will not believe .
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
nay , but that day they shall submit ;
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
on a mighty day ,
we will brand him on the muzzle .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
say : 'is it other than allah that you bid me serve , you ignorant ones ? '
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine . i never decide an affair until you are present with me . ”
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
they said : build for him a building and fling him in the red-hotfire .
and he it is who hath made you successors on the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth in the earth , those who disbelieve will be on the infidelity other than allah , and they will not be able to receive aught but the wrath of their lord .
, tell them , the fire of god is true . say , god will give me a double share of hell . it is only a result of the same for those who have faith . if the people of the believing men and the women had also submitted themselves to god , their share will be doubled . god has the knowledge of the two groups .
freeing a neck
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
satan has gained the mastery over them , and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . behold , the party of satan will be the losers .
then there will come a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
a word is revealed to you in the way of god , so that he may make it clear to you , or in order to make it clear . they are the words of god , and they will have no power to escape .
and whoever of them should say : surely i am a god besides him , such a one we should recompense with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
nothing on earth or in heaven is hidden from allah .
those in truth are the believers ; they have grades of dignity with their lord , and forgiveness , and generous provision .
they will abide therein for ages .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
and o my people ! ask forgiveness of your lord and turn to him in repentance ; he will sendthe sky upon you , and he will add strength to your strength , and do not turn away as sinners . ’
and if they intend to deceive you , then surely allah is sufficient for you . it is he who supported you with his help and with the believers
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
as for the unbelievers , for them is the fire of hell . it will not be decreed to them that they should die , nor will its torment be lightened for them . thus do we requite every ungrateful person .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
they say , “ god has forged the falsehoods of god . if he wills , he will bring us a book ; and god desires to destroy the hearts of his prayers ; surely god knows the thoughts within the hearts . ”
o you who have believed , indeed , the cattle and the flesh of grazing livestock are for youthe tongue of allah . in that case , other than that of which people have been differing , so be wary of allah , so that you may be felicitous .
andone who is brought up among ornaments , and can not make herself clear ?
andabraham , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
and all those on earth .
the lord of moses and aaron . '
when allah made a covenant with the people of the book to make it known to mankind and not conceal it . they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a small price . evil indeed is their bargain .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
and during the night prostrate to him and exalt him a longnight .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
those who say , ‘ our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ’
and they disobeyed the messenger of their lord , so he seized them with an overpowering grip .
when he has created you in stages ?
then lo ! this day theyare sharers in the doom .
and if they reject you , so did their predecessors . their messengers came to them with clear signs , and with scriptures , and with the enlightening book .
but when allah had decided to do so , they will surely have fear in the earth , o people , but you will be repaid by the means of the life of the world . then you will be brought back to life for all your deeds .
he struck them with his right hand .
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
who do not call upon another god with god , nor kill the soul which god has forbidden except by right , and commit illegal sexual intercourse . whoever does this will receive punishment .
and the magicians came to pharaoh and said : 'shall we have a reward if we win ? '
and he gave you of all that you asked him . if you count allah ’ s blessings , you will not be able to count them . indeed man is most unjust , very ungrateful .
on the day when all secrets will be made public ,
so cause a piece of the sky to fall upon us , if you are one of the truthful .
and of the cattle there are some for burden and some for meat ; eat of what allah has provided you and do not follow in satan ’ s footsteps ; he is indeed your manifest enemy .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
and grapes and clover plants ,
and by the angels who regulate the affairs , .
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a sinful people .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
even so . and we shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede except for him whom he approves , and they tremble in awe of him .
they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they destroy none except themselves , but they do not realize it .
and when it is said to them , “ come to what god has sent down and to the messenger , ” you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
then who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is in the name of allah to be mentioned in it , whose aim is to be taken in his name ? they will have a great punishment in this world , but they will have a great punishment in the world to come .
except for a proclamation from allah and his messages . he who disobeys allah and his messenger will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein for a long time .
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
by no means ! he was stubborn towards our revelations .
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
the example of this book is true ; word is true ; word is true ; this is the decree , the decree of your lord , true . what is the matter with your own words , both of them , to whom you have singled out a sound . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
and he it is who hath created you from the truth , and he createth the word thereof ; so that he may make the wife pass away . and when he causeth the human to be a state of the child , he saith : by allah , thou wilt be a confirmer .
the romans have been defeated
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
they will be given to drink of pure wine , sealed .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what ismost gracious ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which thou commandest us ? and it increases them in aversion .
then , when they came to thee with our signs , who believe in our signs , say : peace on you . say : peace on you . your lord is indeed forgiving , merciful .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and , we are indeed going to be in my mother with a painful heart , and the agony of distress shall be brought forth after him : o you , you have been given to me .
which pelted them with stones of baked clay ,
and hell made visible to those who had gone astray .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
o you who believe ! when you hold secret counsel , do it not for sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger ; but converse concerning virtue and piety ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
and with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and palms , and vines , and all kinds of fruits . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
and your lord creates what he wills and chooses . they have not the choice . exalted is allah and high above what they associate with him .
and others from among them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
the jews say : ezra is the son of god . the christians say , the son of god is the son of god . that is what they say with their tongues before their very eyes . how perverse they are !
then we destroyed the others ,
have they not travelled through the earth , that they may see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? the signs of the ancients was hanging down in regard to them , but they were unjust .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
moses said to his people , remember god 's favors to you when he delivered you from pharaoh 's people who were treating you cruelly , putting your sons to death and sparing your women . that was a great trial from your lord .
verily , in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised to them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors ,
and the pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm-tree . she said : oh , would that i had died before this and had been a thing forgotten !
our lord , give us what you have promised us through your messengers and do not disgrace us on the day of resurrection . indeed , you never fail to fulfill your promise .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
and denies the best promise ,
and moses said : my lord knows best who has come with guidance from him , and for whom will be the happy abode .
lo ! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away .
have you considered lat and 'uzza ,
he exalted be the majesty of our lord , who has neither taken to himself a wife , nor a son .
indeed they had plotted sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the ordinance of allah appeared , though they were averse .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
nothing is said to you but what was said to the messengers before you . your lord is possessor of forgiveness , and possessor of painful repayment .
among thornless lote-trees
those who have reverted to disbelief after the guidance had become clear to them , have been seduced and given false hopes by satan .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings reached him , he pleaded with us for the people of lot ;
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
so that allah may separate the bad from the good , and put the wickedone on another , heap them together , and cast them into hell . it is they who are the losers .
then fir'awn sent unto the cities callers :
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
andothers who have acknowledged their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
the children of israel and the children of israel had also been saying to it , ‘ it is only he who invents a thing . he who forges it is to be seen and turns away from it , so that he may be free of the like of it , and he who does not consent to the truth for what he has sent down . and whoever does not judge with that which allah has sent down , will be among the wrongdoers . ’
those who have faith and do righteous deeds—happy are they and good is theirdestination .
you will see the fire when you are driven into the fire . in fact , we will make the unbelievers hear their differences . the unbelievers will say , ‘ indeed the faithless are today of the punishment . ’
they said , “ o sorcerer , invoke your lord for us , by the covenant he has made with you . we will indeed be guided . ”
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
the word of god has already fulfilled , and i am a true doer of the truth , so i will give you a true answer , and i will ask you on the day of judgment , when you have been called upon , and do not follow the tradition of god , for i have been sinful .
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he sent down the criterion . verily , those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , for them will be a severe torment . allah is mighty , the lord of retribution .
god will certainly die and give up the life of the hearts of the faithful in what is in the hearts of god , and who remember the way of god , and who will be the greatest ones in the way of god . so who will be the greatest losers ?
indeed , those who have purchased their slander among the signs of their own , have been virtuous to you . the reward of those who have been given the great sin will have a great punishment .
and what you do not see
he who desires the right path will be made to it . but he who has gone astray will be guided by his mercy . he who does not have any power to do so , will have no share in the least .
and we charge no soul exceptits capacity , and with us is a record which speaks the truth , and they will not be wronged .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
if you call them to guidance , they will not follow you . it is the same for you whether you invite them or whether you are silent .
they said , “ we see an evil omen in you ; if you do not desist , we will stone you , and a painful punishment from us will befall you . ”
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . then if you die , will they live for ever ?
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back .
they said , we worship idols and are devoted to them .
they said , “ the punishment for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall be found for it ; so this is how we punish the unjust . ”
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
and among people are some that are eager to be one of the other ; and if the misfortune happens to you , it is the same ; this is the truth ; and this is the very truth .
for he neither trusted , nor prayed .
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah is the one god . there is no deity except him . if they do not have any option , he is only the one god ; and if the unbelievers do not know .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
this qur'an is not such as could have been invented by other than allah . it confirms what was before it , and a detailed exposition of the book in which there is no doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
when allah made a covenant with the people of the book to make it known to mankind and not conceal it . they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a small price . evil indeed is their bargain .
and helped them , so they were victorious .
their lord gives them good news of mercy from himself , and of his good pleasure ; for them await gardens wherein is lasting bliss ,
moses said , pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of the universe ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
and turn not thy cheek in scorn toward men , nor walk with pertness in the land . lo ! allah loveth not each braggart boaster .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror comes from their hearts , they say : what was it that your lord said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
he said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not touch you . with our signs , you and those who follow you will be the victors .
then whoever changes the bequest after he has heard it , the sin is only upon those who change it . indeed , allah is hearing and knowing .
and among them is he who says : grant me leaveand put me not into trial . surely , they have fallen into trial . and verily , hell is surrounding the disbelievers .
and the birds , too , gathered each obedient to him .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
but those who deny our revelations will be seized by nemesis for being disobedient .
but allah is your protector , and he is the best of helpers .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and do good works shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
in which are written proper affairs .
we used to sit in its positions to eavesdrop , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
we will make you recite so you will not forget ,
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
otherwise , if disaster should afflict them because of that which their own hands have sent before , they should say : our lord ! why didst thou not send a messenger to us that we might have followed thy signs and been of the believers ?
and the earth which he spread out ,
when you see those who plungeinto our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit after the recollection with the unjust people .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
whoso desires a proclamation , let him look at the glory of god , and say to him a reputable saying : what is the matter to be sent down . for them is a terrible reward .
an orphan near of kin .
and we turned it upside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
then , the command of allah is true . then allah will bring to him the law and the judgement , and he gave him wisdom and knowledge . but allah is gracious to you , and allah is bountiful to you .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
those are they whom allah hath cursed ; and he whom allah hath cursed , thouwilt find for him no helper .
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and all his followers .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
and when they see a sign they incite one another to scoff ,
lo ! ye , even so , do thou love them , and they have been commanded . but when they are , they say : we believe ; but when ye are alone , then say : lo ! we are in the breasts of the breasts . say : lo ! allah is aware of what is in the breasts .
—the day when man will remember his endeavours
then he looked up at the stars ,
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment , and had it not been for a term appointed , the punishment would certainly have come to them . and indeed , it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
verily , we sent nuhto his people : warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment .
o mankind ! fear your lord ; indeed the earthquake of the last day is a tremendous thing .
and indeed he is ardent for the love of good .
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
indeed , we left a clear sign for a nation that understands .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
they can not help them , for themarmy are brought .
and indeed those before them denied , then howwas my reproach .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
believers , do not be presumptuous with god . the words of god is true . do not speak a sound word of sound words . the words of god are certainly true . do not make a mistake .
it is not for any believer , man or woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into manifest error .
we have destined death for you and no one can challenge us
say , “ if our forefathers were to be your wives and your children , and you have your wealth , and the bondwomen which you have , on account of what you have sent ahead , for the sake of god and his noble messenger ; so wait . god does not guide the true people . ”
and verily , your lord will gather them together . indeed , he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and we admitted them into our mercy ; they were of the righteous .
destroyed we not the ancients ?
praise be to god , lord of the worlds ,
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ,
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
then fashioned we the drop a clot , then fashioned we the clot a little lump , then fashioned we the little lump bones , then clothed the bones with flesh , and then produced it as another creation .
we created man from an extract of clay .
abasing , exalting ,
and they will be marshalled before thy lord in ranks : now have ye come to us as we created you the first time . aye ! ye fancied that we had appointed for you no tryst .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
except those of the right hand
follow what is revealed to you , and be patient until god issues his judgment . he is the best of judges .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
and hell is there for all to see ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
whoever takes allah for a guide , his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of allah are indeed the victorious .
and who sent down water from the sky in a known measure , and we revived thereby a land that was dead ; even so will you be brought forth .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found not for themselves besides allahhelpers .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but there is a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
say : o ye men ! if ye are in doubt as to my religion , theni do not worship those whom ye worship beside allah . but i worship allah who causeth you to die , and i am commanded to be of the believers .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we had blessed for all people .
allah knows those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
then it will be for us to explain it .
we sent forth noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them were rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them ; and we guided noah before ; and among his descendants were david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
ta sin mim .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
but when the great catastrophe comes ,
nay , again , they will come to know !
he will say , ‘ by allah , you had almost ruined me !
verily he who hath imposed the qur'an upon thee , will bring thee back to the place of return . say : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : cast whateveryou have to cast .
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the tongue of him to whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech clear .
but we found there but one house of those surrendered .
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
when the trumpet blast is sounded they will come out of their graves and hasten to their lord .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
taught man what he did not know .
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
he would have remained inside the fish till the day of resurrection .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and zakariya , and yahyaand 'iesaand iliyas , each one of them was of the righteous .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
and firaun , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs and confronting the hereafter – they will be hauled into the punishment .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your reckoning .
he said , “ if god were to extend any one of you , then do you deny the others with whom you are ruined ? you are not at all as a sign for your forefathers ; and you are waiting with god . ”
a mention of the mercy of your lord to his servant zakariya .
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward .
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
and the astray follow the poets .
so when they angered us , we punished them , and drowned them all .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeedto receive reward or punishment ?
and why should we not believe in allah and in the truth that has come to us , and we yearn for our lord to admit us among the righteous ?
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
when their messengers came to them from before them and behind them , saying , do not worship any one but god . they said , if our lord had pleased he would have sent down angels . we are indeed going to believe in your message .
he begets not , nor was he begotten ;
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
the practiceof allah already in the past : no change wilt thou find in the practiceof allah .
and united their hearts . had you spent all that is in the earth , you could not have united their hearts , but allah has united them . indeed , he is exalted in might and wise .
a multitude of thosewill be from the first generation .
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
on the day when the earth will be changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the all-paramount
o children of israel ! we have put you in the place of the life of the world in the world to come ; so follow the judgement in the matter of god , and follow the law of the god ; for them is a painful punishment .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
and know that the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; and the wealth and the children of the world ; then it is a fitting provision , and the wealth of the sky will be made manifest , and it is a fitting thing for them .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , no harm having touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and none but allah can avert it .
and the secrets of the hearts exposed ,
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from himself and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book after we had destroyed the generations of old : enlightenment unto mankind and a guidance and a mercy , that haply they might be admonished .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
and indeed we know that you are disheartened by their speech .
and for man is he who has sent down the book , and bestowed on them the book and the wisdom , then he says : be ye then in respect of my bondmen , as unto that which allah hath taught . so that ye may be admonished .
have you then seen that the people will be admitted to the garden in which they are made to enter the garden , is the only place of the believers ? they will be told , when god has the power to take the good things of those who have attained to faith , are the ones who have submitted themselves to god . tell them : god has the power to do so .
he is the one who accepts the faithless from among the people of the book and the laws of the book , so that it is in the first manner . and they did not tell you about the first time , so it is in the case of allah that they may be guided .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and what they had invented will abandon them .
and my authority has vanished . ”
this is how he has revealed to you the qur'an , in order that you may recite the story of its people on the day of judgment , and will recite it to them on the day of judgment , and they will be brought into paradise .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
half of it , or reduce it a little ;
accursed be the conjecturers
they give food , for the love of him , to the needy , the orphan , the captive ,
said firaun , “ you have accepted faith in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a conspiracy which you have plotted in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you shall know !
or do they say : a poet ! we await for him some calamityby time !
and they say , “ when will this promise be , if you are truthful ? ”
say , “ i am forbidden to worship those you call upon besides god . ” say , “ i do not follow your desires , for then i would go astray , and i would not be of the rightly guided . ”
herein are really signs for those who discern .
and when the messengers ' time is set
who , out of his bounty , has lodged us in an abode wherein no toil nor weariness affects us .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
of his mercy hath he appointed for you night and day , that therein ye may rest , and that ye may seek his bounty , and that haply ye may give thanks .
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
he said , “ do they hear you when you call ? ”
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , such will face a painful torment .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
the gardens of perpetuity , which they will enter , beneath which rivers flow . they will have therein whatever they wish . thus does allah reward the righteous ,
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
did you see him who turned away ,
say , o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray only strays to his own detriment . i am not a guardian over you .
by the luminious book .
except our first death , and we shall not be punished ?
this is hell which the guilty deny .
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
and if ye reject the infidels , as they are disbelievers in it , then they will not be able to make a allies of allah , and if they disobey allah , then he is not of the friends , nor the helpers .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord in supplication .
so turn away from them , and say : peace . but they will come to know .
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he made it a perfect voice , and he made a proclamation to him ? and if thou callest them to the guidance , then they will not have faith .
then evil was the end of those who did evil , because they denied the signs of allah and used to ridicule them .
our lord , give them double the punishment and curse them with a mighty curse .
the punishment of your lord is certain to come .
indeed , we sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray , goes astray to his own detriment , and you are not their overseer .
and thus do we recompense him who is prodigal and believes not in the signs of his lord ; and the punishment of the hereafter is more severe and more lasting .
and the word of allah has proved true to them , and they say : are these the ones who have been given charge of them ? we have been content with them , and we made them a thing , and allah 's command is that which they fabricate .
believers , do not make friends with those who have suffered the wrath of god . they have despaired of the hereafter , just as the unbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves .
we then kept it in a safe place .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought before him .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
your striving is indeed to different ends !
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
did you ) not seehow your lord dealt with 'ad ?
he said , ‘ it is so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
have you not regarded the true believers that we have sent down to you that which is sent down to you , whatever is sent down to you , and to say , “ in fact , you have been commanded to accept the truth ? ” and the devil desires to be a muslim .
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
has there come to you the story of the hosts
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed evil was that which they used to do .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord is that their works are as ashes , on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day ; they have no control over aught that they have earned . that is the extreme failure .
and when he did not make the opponents to come into his presence , they said , “ did you not consider that your father has been dropped with him ? ” so he made them quit of that our promise ; and he is the best of judges .
we have sent down to you clarifying verses , and examples of those who passed away before you , and an admonition for the godfearing .
they used to hew dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
fruits ; and they will be honoured .
it was the like of god 's bounties that he has given them . they said , “ god has no sanction any . ” say , “ who is a god not given to any one ? ” say , “ who is a god not given to any one ? ” say , “ god has given me the book ; then leave them to the straight path ; then leave it to the people , and let them be in play . ”
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
verily , we have warned you of a near torment , the day when a man will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , ‘ alas ! would that i were dust ! ’
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and bliss
your lord is the originator of the heavens and the earth , then the throne of the throne and the throne will be concluded . the sun and the moon will be called out by god 's command . the words of god will be the supreme .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
from which you are turning away .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
have you not seen those who fear of death , while they have no one to be of any benefit to them ? god said , you have been given to life . god is possessor of exceeding bounty .
, o jesus , son of mary ! is it true to me , o son of mary ? he said , god is too exalted to be considered equal to me . i have knowledge of the things you have done . it is you who have knowledge of the things that you have done .
but they hamstrung her . hesaid , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
that indeed is a division most unfair !
: what ! now ! when hitherto thou hast rebelled and been of the wrong-doers ?
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit ; it shall come forth white , without evil ; that is a second sign .
and in moses , after him , we sent a calf from his ornaments , a body of their ornaments . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it and became wrongdoers .
yet he wants that i should give him more .
and youwill be in three kinds .
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
and had it not been that allah had decreed banishment for them , he would surely have punished them in this world ; and for them in the hereafter is the punishment of the fire .
o prophet ! fear god , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
o ye who believe ! when ye die , then the followers of death shall come to you . on the contrary , the words of whether ye are in regard to allah , either of you as two as two as two as two as if ye were to be in the meeting of the meeting with allah . lo ! we are of the truth-tellers .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah leaves astray - for him there is no guide .
those to whom we have given the book know himas they know their own children . but those who have lost their souls will not believe .
we have bestowed our favour on you before this
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to himwho created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for your worldly life .
so fear god as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , that is better for yourselves . those who are saved from their own greed will have everlasting happiness .
we are about to give you a heavy message .
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
allah has set forth for them a parable , in accordance with inspiration ; this is the word of one word ; in different ways , it will be different . and this is the guidance of allah , and he guides whom he will , and he is a guide for the sake of allah .
moses prayed , lord , forgive me and my brother and admit us to your mercy , for you are most merciful of the merciful .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
and they worship besides allah that which does not possess for themprovision from the heavens and the earth , nor have they any power .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
so woe to those that pray
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
but the disbelievers rejected , and we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark . then how was the end of those who have been warned ?
they said , “ we bring you good news in truth , therefore do not despair . ”
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
look ! they fold their breasts , to hide from him . but when they cover themselves with their garments , he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he knows what lies within the hearts .
when i have fashioned himand breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
in the life to come , they will certainly be the losers .
and when the angels said , 'mary , god has chosen thee , and purified thee ; he has chosen thee above all women .
and if you find no-one therein , do not enter until permission is given to you ; and if you are told to go away , then go away ; that is purer for you ; and allah knows what you do .
he said : o my lord ! verily thou art in the life of the world , and thou hast received a goodly station : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us a good brand , so that their hearts should not taste the torment .
: we feed you only for the sake of allah . we desire no reward from you , nor thanks .
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
to god belong the angels , in which the human being set out , and his command is to be seen by god 's command . god 's plan is not to be seen of anyone , no one can save them in the least .
and had we not given thee strength , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
and with it he produces for you crops , and olives , and palms , and vines , and all kinds of fruits . surely in that is a sign for a people who reflect .
so believe in allah and his messenger and in the light that we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
this is of the news of the unseen that we reveal to you . you were not present when they agreed upon their plan , scheming .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond ;
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah sees well all that ye do .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and they stayed in their cave three hundred years andaddnine .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with it , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you hoarded up for yourselves . ”
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
have you not regarded those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he wills and they will not be wronged a whit .
then , o dear prophet , after this , the day of judgment will be made public , and the matter is in truth . they have said , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a thing which is indeed allah ’ s precedent , and say , ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a certain thing . ’
allah has not appointedbahirah or sa'ibah or wasilah or ham . but those who disbelieve invent lies about allah , and most of them do not have any understanding .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
after him , we said to the israelites , dwell in the land . when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you together as a crowd .
say : 'what , do you see that of the things that can create you , or if he brings it to it , or has the life of the world to come , shall you be restored to it ? ' say : 'god . ' and then , behold , it is god , the lord of the worlds .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
he has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
i seek not any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and take for yourselves palaces and fortresses that you might abide eternally ?
believers , do not accept your repentance , your lord will forgive you your sins , and will forgive you your sins , and will forgive you the gardens of eden . the day that the hearts will be in light , and they will be called to the right path .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
then it will be for us to call them to account .
he said : peace be on thee ! i will ask forgiveness of my lord for thee . lo ! he is ever gracious unto me .
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves with your own hands into destruction ; and do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind , and if an affliction visits you , they say : allah was gracious to me that i was not present with them .
to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . god is witness over everything .
surely what you are threatened with must come to pass and you can not escape .
and approach not adultery ; verily it is ever an abomination and vile as a pathway .
thus will thy lord choose thee , and teach thee the interpretation of storiesand perfect his favour unto thee and unto the house of jacob , as he perfected it on thy fathers abraham and isaac aforetime , for thy lord is full of knowledge and wisdom .
there is no one comparable to him .
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
so when they angered us , we punished them , and drowned them all .
when they said , ‘ indeed joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are , although we are a hardy band . our father is indeed in manifest error . ’
he ran away to the laden ship ,
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
then pharaoh withdrew , summoned up his guile , and then arrived .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
this is the reward of allah to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : ' i do not ask you any reward for it . ' say , “ it is not for you to be rewarded by anything except his own good ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most appreciative . ”
the day the unbelievers will be told , what is the truth of the truth ? it will say , the truth is with the truth . god will say , the truth is that you are the unjust ones .
and a people for whom you will find a portion of it , and some of the people of mecca ; and when they are invited to be , there is no doubt about it ; and if they are seduced , then they are upon you a clear authority .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful .
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for those who take heed for themselves ,
and we will surely let man see the mother of maryam , and if they are the ones of the believers , then surely , should they have been the believers . so do not be of the ones who have been given knowledge .
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
does he not know , when what isin the graves is turned over ,
the words of god and his messenger is for the people of the day . god and his messenger are free from all the same . if you are bent on denying the truth , the day of judgment will certainly be better for you . but if you should turn away , then know that you will not be able to escape from god .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
or its water may sink into the earth , so that you will never be able to find it again .
do you not bring back his soul , if you are truthful ?
and why should allah not punish them while they stopfrom al-masjid-al-haram , and they are not its guardians ? only the godwary are its befitting custodians , but most of them do not know .
allah has promised the hypocrites , both men and women , and the disbelievers , the fire of hell , to remain in it ; it is sufficient for them ; and allah has cursed them , and for them is a lasting punishment .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
bending his side , in order to leadastray from the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the penalty of burning .
we have indeed composed his name in the name of allah after it has been revealed to you . after this , we have not revealed to you the way of our lord . it is only for us to make clear to us the religion of our lord . indeed , the best of our lord is the best .
how many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have we destroyed before them ?
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at !
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
so wait with patience for the decision of your lord , and be not like the companion of the fish , when he cried while he was in distress .
and if they behold a sign , they turn away and say : prolonged illusion .
verily he who hath imposed the qur'an upon thee , will bring thee back to the place of return . say : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we had blessed for all people .
say : 'have you considered ? if his punishment comes upon you by night or day , what part of it will the sinners seek to hasten ? '
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and desire to divide between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in some , ' desiring to take between the two ,
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves : 'warn mankind , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their lord'the unbelievers say : 'this is a clear sorcerer '
say , ‘ o my people ! act according to your ability ; indeed , i am working . soon you will know in whose favour the outcome of that abode will be . indeed the wrongdoers will not be felicitous . ’
in both of them will be fruits , date-palms and pomegranates .
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit ; it shall come forth white , without evil ; that is a second sign .
or lest you should say , ‘ our fathers ascribed partnersbeforeand we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ’
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him therein what we will for whom we please . then we have appointed for him hell , he shall enter it despised , driven away .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
and we defer it only to a term determined .
your lord will decide between them by his judgement . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
then causes him to die and buries him ,
rude and fake besides .
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and indeed we showed him our signs , all of them , but he denied and refused .
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
so the punishment overtook them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
so set your face to the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has created man . there is no changing of the creation of allah . that is the straight religion , but most people do not know .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they lied .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . indeed , cows look alike to us ; and if allah wills , we will be guided . ”
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
there is none who could avert it .
those they invoke themselves seek the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
he would have led us far away from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is farthest astray inway .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows the prayer and the glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
and collectand hide it .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed ; and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and judgement will be passed between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
and we have guarded itfrom every outcast shaitan .
surely he knows what is spoken openly and he knows what you conceal .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! are you recompensed for aught but what you did ? '
look then at the signs of allah 's mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
possibly you may risk your life by grievingfor them if they do not believe in this narration .
gardens of perpetual residence which they will enter , along with whoever is righteous from among their fathers , their spouses and their descendants . the angels will enter upon them from every gate ,
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
we have destined death for you and no one can challenge us
o moses , it is i , god , the almighty , the wise .
and do not touch her with harm , lest the punishment of a great day seizes you . ”
then hell is the shelter .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
as for the righteously striving believers , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
we are eager that our lord should forgive us our offenses , for we are the first of the believers '
and on the day when he will call them and say : where are those whom you deemed to be my associates ?
what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition ? -
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , we will surely remove from them their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
the punishment of those who disbelieve is so the case of the truth is at the hands of god . god has given them victory and piety . god is cognizant of all things .
and the record of every person is in accordance with his own deeds ; and the guilty shall say , “ woe to us – we must be responsible for it ; and the qur ’ an is proper for them , so the lord does not oppress anyone .
he admits whom he wills into his mercy ; but the wrongdoers - he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and he said unto his wife : give him the glad tidings of a voice : so let him who exceeded , or gets to forget our son . thus , then , we have seen it , as we perceived the likes of them , and allah is ever a wakilover the worlds .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
has taught the quran .
is he then who creates like him who does not create ? will you not then take admonition ?
and cherishing his parents , not arrogant , rebellious .
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ;
so that you may warn a people whose fathers were not warned , so they are unaware .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
i will fill hell with you and with all those among them who follow you . ”
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
do you not see that allah has created all that is in the heavens and the earth and he has favoured you with his own favors ? and the words of allah are the manifest .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and to jacob , and said , “ o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as the muslims . ”
and the outstrippers , the outstrippers
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he made with you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
they will go round between it and between hot , boiling water .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
and that my punishment is the painful punishment .
he said : i am not going to prostrate myself unto a mortal whom thou hast created from ringing clay of loam moulded .
then hell is the shelter .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
in both of them will be fruits , date-palms and pomegranates .
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
a gift to mary , mary said to mary , “ i am a messenger of god to you , ” he said , “ the messenger of god has come to you ; so when the clear commands comes to me , then , after me , they said , this is a clear magic . ”
indeed , what you are promised is true .
have you considered the sperm that you emit ?
who seeks to expel you from your land by his sorcery . what is your counsel '
the son of mary is nothing but a son of the son of mary . there is no deity except that of which there is a mention of the people of mary . they will receive the tradition of god on which they will be condemned .
and they came to their father in the evening weeping .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and do not disgrace me on the day they are resurrected .
from the right and from the left , in groups ?
said : o my people ! if i have been guided to the right way from my lord , and hold fast to him , and be with him , they will be brought aright .
so i swear by what you see
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened - lo ! the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
then put him into hell .
is he who has done the dead to the right way , and has spoken the light of the people on account of their bellies ? thus do we reward the things they do .
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
and there is beauty in them for you when you bring them home and when you drive them forth to pasture .
and allah is knower of your enemies ; and sufficient is allah as a wali , and allah is sufficient as a supporter .
while they sat around it ,
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ’
allah is he who created you weak , then after weakness gave you strength , then after strength gave you weakness and gray hair . he creates what he wills . and he is the knowing , the competent .
but we see it near .
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ;
save from their wives or thethat their right hands possess , for then they are not blameworthy ;
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
and the record of every person is in accordance with his own deeds ; and the guilty shall say , “ woe to us – we must be responsible for it ; and the qur ’ an is proper for them , so the lord does not oppress anyone .
what could inform thee but that he might grow
and those who disbelieve say : wherefore is not a sign sent down unto him from his lord ! say thou : verily allah sendeth astray whomsoever he will , and guideth unto himself whosoever turnoth in penitence .
those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in the faith , and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who believe . lord , you are indeed compassionate and merciful .
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and an advice to the godwary .
do not yearn for other people 's property and wives , and do not grieve over them , and lower your wing to the believers .
on the day you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
lo ! we have created every thing by measure .
and say : praise be to allah , he will show you his signs , and you will recognize them . and your lord is not unaware of what you do .
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good ,
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you do .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
scrambling towards the caller ; the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
the day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands , he will say , oh , would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
i swear by the day of resurrection .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
we have already recounted to you what we have forbidden to the jews . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
and we shall certainly make them taste a lesser punishment before the greater punishment , so that perhaps they may return to us .
what befell you on the day when the two armies met was by the leave of allah , and that he might know the believers .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
he has counted them and calculated their number .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
‘ kill them , and to expel you from the homes which them has driven them . ’ indeed , it is for the disbelievers that they should turn away from it . and indeed , it is for the disbelievers that they should be faithless .
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
look , how they invent a lie against allah ! and sufficient is that as a manifest sin .
obey god and obey the messenger , and be cautious . if you turn away , know that the duty of our messenger is only to plainly convey the message .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to himwho created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for your worldly life .
and , they will have faith in allah and the last day , when he does not desire to be like the permission of allah , and their hearts are averse to them , or their their their hearts are set right . they are the ones who have been given the glad news of the words of allah , so they are the ones who will be admitted to the gardens of judgement . they are the ones who will be admitted to the gardens of eden through their streams .
we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous ,
: o john ! hold fast the book . and we gave him wisdom while yet a child
then we set thee on the jurisprudence of the command , so follow it and do not follow the low desires of those who do not know .
do not implicate god in your oaths to avoid doing good , being pious and keeping peace between people , for god hears all and knows everything .
said he , 'get thee down from hence ! it is not for thee to wax proud here ; so go thou forth ; surely thou art of the abject ones . '
by your lord , we will question them all
indeed , we left a clear sign for a nation that understands .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
verily we ! we established him in the earth , and vouchsafed unto him of everything a way .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been aught good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
how many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind ,
and do not rebuke the beggar .
lest you should say , ‘ the book was only sent down to two groups before us , and we were indeed unaware of their studies , ’
how we pour water in showers
or like he who came to the right direction in the course of its sway and said : what is it that shall be the ? he will say , ‘ shall allah revive the dead ? he said , ‘ by no means ! maybe he will be dead . ’ ‘ this is a clear prophesy . ’
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
say , “ it is the punishment for you . so keep aside from it , and do not follow the sound of them , but when you are worthy to be pure – so when they are worthy to accept it , god does not accept the right path . ”
his wealth did not avail him , nor did what he acquired .
so his lord heard his prayer and fended off their wiles from him . lo ! he is hearer , knower .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
the king said , “ bring him to me , and i will reserve him for myself . and when he spoke to him , he said , “ indeed you are today , with us , honoured and trusted . ”
and whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul , then seeketh pardon of allah , will find allah forgiving , merciful .
so when the sight becomes dazed ,
o prophet ! say to those captives who are in your hands : if allah knows any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against allah , or saith : i am unto you a revelation revealed unto me , and he who cries lies to the truth , and who said : bring unto me the book as allah hath revealed : and if the wrong-doers be , then declare unto allah a thing , and be stiff-necked .
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical lot .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
: this is our gift , so bestow thou , or withhold , without reckoning .
those who are patient , and put their trust in their lord .
and we did not create the heaven and earth and that between them in play .
bring me blocks of iron to fill up the passage between the two mountains . then , when he had levelled a fire , he said , ‘ bring me molten copper to pour over it . ’
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him , or why have there not come with him angels as companions ?
those who remember god , standing , sitting , and on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : lord , thou hast not created this in vain . glory be to thee ! guard us against the chastisement of the fire .
when they come to you , when they pledged to the believers , they would say , no matter for god . do not consider anything equal to god , nor do you make a partner to him . do not make a breach with god , for god is forgiving and kind .
there is indeed a sign in that for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all people will be gathered ,
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these it is who shall have a disgraceful chastisement .
for the beggar and the deprived .
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
he said : o my lord ! verily thou art in the life of the world , and thou hast received a goodly station : our lord ! vouchsafe unto us a good brand , so that their hearts should not taste the torment .
.
so today none of you can benefit or harm one another . and we shall say to the wrongdoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ”
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
gardens and vineyards ,
who have broken the koran into parts .
and by the moon as it follows it ;
this quran guides to the most upright way and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that they will have a great reward .
who confirm the day of doom
can one who stands on a clear proof from his lord , be like one enamoured of his evil deeds and follows his inane desires ?
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
when the sky is rent asunder , and becomes red like red leather ,
believers , do not ask about things about which it could be revealed to you . if you ask about such things , they will receive your repentance . god has exempted you . he is all-forgiving and forbearing .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
the knower of the invisible and the visible , the exalted , the praised .
he said : o musa ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering upon them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is forgiving and merciful .
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment .
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
if they deny you , so were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs , scriptures and enlightening book .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
if he were to ask you for them and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he would expose your unwillingness .
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
o you who believe ! why do you call to mind when you have patience , and struggle in the religion of this word , so the worldly life is near , and the life of this world is very brief ?
near which is the garden of repose .
let man consider his food .
and we shall certainly make them taste a lesser punishment before the greater punishment , so that perhaps they may return to us .
allah has created the two hearts of which he will not say , ‘ this is what you have . ’ say , ‘ these are indeed the two who are true . ’
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
she said to his sister : follow him . so she watched him from a distance while they perceived not .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
had they believed in allah and the prophet and in what was revealed to him , they would not have taken them as allies . but many of them are disobedient .
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but that which is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
so , when the time for the first of the twocame came , we sent against you our servants full of martial might , who ravagedcountry , and it was a promise performed .
besides allah ? they will say : they have failed us . in fact , we used not to call upon anything before . thus does allah send astray the disbelievers .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he bestowed on us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the sustainer .
they said , as they turned towards them , “ what are you missing ? ”
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from allah ’ s way , and you will have a great punishment .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
an efreet of the jinns said : i will bring it to thee before thou rise from thy place ; verily i am strong and trusty for it .
and in whatever thing you disagree , its ruling isto allah . that is allah , my lord . in him , i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
they are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but fire ; and vain are the deeds they did therein , and their works are null .
have they not heard the story of those who were given the lie to before them , and the people of noah , and the people of abraham , and the people of tubba ? but they were not unjust to them ; they wronged themselves .
and when the mountains are blown away ;
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall be in the midst of the gardens , and in the midst of the foundation that are carried by the coolness of the garden , in which they shall be flowing .
he said : lookest thou ! when we betook ourselves to the rock , then i forgot the fish ; and naught but satan made me forget to mention it , and it took its way into the sea a marvel .
the case of the people of the book came to themthat they have been inspired in it . the matter is true . he said , ‘ my son ! he wishes to show you the reward of what you learned , and the elders of moses said to the faithless , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
so fight in the way of allah , you are responsible only for yourself . and rouse the believers . perhaps allah will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and confirms the best promise ,
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
you will recognize in their faces the freshness of bliss .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we shall never believe in you .
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
and talk as did the people of old .
but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ expel lot ’ s family from your town . they are indeed a puritanical lot . ’
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
taught him the mode of expression .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
and not known my account !
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
by no means ! anon they shall know .
the oppressors will say , “ we are all in it ; god has judged between his servants . ”
this is a right way , to show people . a part of that is a part of the reward for it . it is a fitting reward for the words of god . god is all-aware of everything .
our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after thou hast guided us , and bestow on us mercy from thine presence . lo ! thou , only thou , art the bestower .
but my call added only to their flight .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
that he may admit the believers , men and women , into gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever , and acquit them of their evil deeds , that is the mighty triumph ,
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
it is he who made you trustees on the earth , and exalted some in rank over others in order to try you by what he has given you . your lord is quick in retribution , and he is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
taught man what he did not know .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and certainly , you will not seek to do something , nor can they question you . but they will surely be called to account , but they have no faith in the truth . but if they turn away , then they will not be sorry , and allah will punish them in the matter .
and when our command came , we saved hud and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and we saved them from a harsh punishment .
when it is said to them : 'come to that which is revealed to you , ' they will say , 'god 's ' is sufficient to be fulfilled . what , even if the word is true , what is the matter with us ? what , do they speak '
lo ! he verily is able to return him
taught him the mode of expression .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
o you who have faith ! do not take your opinions in place of your own , and do not follow in your religion a thing . indeed , it is the thing for you to commit evil , and evil is the result of their deeds .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
and whoever is opposed to allah , be patient , and be dutiful to him ; this is better , for the lord of the book , so that you may be of the losers .
i seek not any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and he turned away from them and said : alas for joseph ! his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they ask for goodwill , then they are not of those who are allowed to appease .
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they boasted and exulted at the knowledge they had , of what they had mocked .
god is the only lord as the lord of the universe , the living , the everlasting . whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the master of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with him that he has no knowledge of the universe ?
and the trumpet will be blown , that will be the day whereof warning .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in the former and in the latter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
and that is indeed a mighty adjuration if ye but knew -
it is not a thing for amusement .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition ? -
o you who believe ! be steadfast in the remembrance of allah , and be with the commands of allah , there is no one to be admitted to any of you , so that you may be godwary . indeed , allah is all-aware of what you do .
take this shirt of mine and cast it on my father 's face , he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
they said , by allah , we swear to one another that will attack him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful . ’
you will surely ride from stage to stage .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
anxious when an ill befalls him
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
created we you not of water despicable ,
and hell made visible to those who had gone astray .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
tidings containing a deterrent have come to them
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
with it will bea mixture of tasnim :
one of the two women said , “ father , hire him ; the best employee for you is the strong and trustworthy . ”
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
but their brethren , they draw them into error , and then they do not spare .
'put him in a wooden box and cast it in the river . the river will cast it on the bank . an enemy and an enemy of ours will retrieve it .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
indeed , we have the power to restore his very finger tips !
and they used to say , “ when we are dead and turned into dust and bones , are we to be resurrected ?
and give to them the laws of the fire , in the midst of the fire ; they will say , “ our lord ! do not give us the good news of the deeds of hell ; and what is the matter with us , if he wills ? ” and it will be said to them , “ be , the punishment of the burning . ”
have they not heard the story of those who were given the lie to before them , and the people of noah , and the people of abraham , and the people of tubba ? but they were not unjust to them ; they wronged themselves .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
by no means ! by the moon ,
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
and allah will increase those who were guided in guidance ; and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for resort .
but those who have believed and those who have emigrated and fought in the cause of allah - those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
we found nocovenant in most of them . lo ! most of them we found wrong-doers .
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
or he may cause them to founder for what they have earned , andpardon most ;
or to a needy person in misery ;
the best among them said , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ ‘ why do you not glorify ? ’ ’ ’
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
, tell them , on the day of judgment , when the day of judgment arrives , they will have no fear , nor will they be grieved .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and i said : ask forgiveness of your lord ; verily he is ever most forgiving .
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
if you have any plans , use them .
he will say , ‘ the course of a book is set up . indeed , he will make it a spring . and he who is given the book will be given to it by his command . and the command of allah is only with the hands of those who have faith . they are the ones who have been patient . ’
but their brethren , they draw them into error , and then they do not spare .
and the a-ad , and fir'awn ; and the brethren of lut .
thus , we have made the quran clear to you , so we reveal to them the book . they said : “ if only you could see a day , or part of a day . so let them look at the time of a day . let them have the right course . so let them be free from want , so that they may take heed .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
while you make merry ?
the most merciful , who are the first to be the first to worship and have submitted themselves to the will of god and who have submitted themselves to the will of god and are pleased with them , and will live in it for ever .
he said , ‘ o noah ! indeed he is not of your family . indeed , he is of unrighteous conduct . so do not ask me about that which you have no knowledge . i advise you lest you should be among the ignorant . ’
as such we established joseph in the land to live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whom we please , and we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , but when we confer a favor on him , he says , ‘ i have only been given it because ofknowledge . indeed , it is a test , but most of them do not know .
, ask the forgiveness of their sins or ask for your forgiveness . if you ask forgiveness for them , god will not forgive them , for god does not guide the evil-doers .
he struck them with his right hand .
say : 'what think you ? if god should make the day unceasing over you , until the day of resurrection , what god other than god shall bring you night to repose in ? will you not see ? '
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
but god would not punish them while thou wast with them , nor will he punish them while they begged forgiveness .
and do not make your oaths a means of deceit between you , lest a foot should slip after being firmly planted and you should taste evil because you hindered from allah ’ s way , and you will have a great punishment .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose people are servile unto us ?
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . so i prolonged enjoyment for the disbelievers ; then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
but the evildoers dwell forever in the chastisement of gehenna
as for those who argue concerning allah after he has been accepted , their arguments will be annulled before their lord , and upon them is wrath , and for them is a severe punishment .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we shall marry them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
and the a-ad , and fir'awn ; and the brethren of lut .
and iwill make a scheme .
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all those in them would have been depraved . in fact , we have brought them their reminder , but they turned away from their reminder .
when an affliction befalls man , he calls upon us , but when we confer a favor on him , he says , ‘ i have only been given it because ofknowledge . indeed , it is a test , but most of them do not know .
for the companions of the right hand .
the hypocrites try to deceive god , but he is deceiving them . when they stand up to pray they stand up lazily , showing off to the people , and do not remember god but little ,
when allah promised to grant you one of the two parties , and you wished that the one not armedshould be yours , but allah willed to justify the truth by his words and to cut off the roots of the disbelievers .
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
indeed , when it has reached the breast-bones .
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
to excuse or to warn ,
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he made with you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
and by the night when it withdraws ,
know that allah revives the earth after it becomes lifeless . we have made clear to you the signs , that haply you will understand .
and how can you take it back , when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
they thought , as you thought , that god would never raise up anyone .
you do not ask them any reward for it . it is only a reminder for all mankind .
say : has there come unto you the good news of the book with which is sent down unto those who fear , with their lord , theirs shall be gardens whereunder the rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders ? truly , allah is the beholder of his bondmen .
so we inflicted retribution on them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
and thamood , and the people of lot , and the dwellers of the thicket such were the confederates .
that is because they opposed god and his messenger , and whoever opposes god should know that god 's retribution is severe .
by your life , they wandered blindly in their dazzlement .
there is no fault in you that you enter uninhabited houses wherein there is convenience for you . allah knows what you reveal and what you conceal .
and when the punishment descended upon them , they said : o moses ! pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . if you lift the plague from us , we will certainly believe in you and let the children of israel go with you .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book after we had destroyed the generations of old : enlightenment unto mankind and a guidance and a mercy , that haply they might be admonished .
allah has set a parable for his people , a man of taking revenge , so a man is only in the case of the same . is it a man of the same time ? is it not that the two of them are in the same way ? only the number of them are the same .
andothers who have acknowledged their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
that we have created man into a life of toil and trial .
and for their taking usury , which were prohibited to them , and their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful chastisement .
are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them by night while they are asleep ?
the path of those whom you have blessed , not of those upon whom is the anger , nor the astray .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their riches , and a land which ye have not trodden . and allah is over everything ever potent .
then , when they reached the junction between them , they forgot about their fish , and it took its way into the sea .
the blind and the sighted are not equal , just as those who believe and do good works and those who do evil are not equal . how seldom you reflect !
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
god has made the light light which he has made a light for the welfare of men and the birds as well as the adornment of the people and the birds . this is what god has created in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things .
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
they said , “ the punishment for it is that he in whose bag it is found shall be found for it ; so this is how we punish the unjust . ”
as if they had never lived there . oh , away with the people of midian , just as the thamud were done away with !
but they hamstrung her . hesaid , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
for those who have been given knowledge of this book , know that this quran is a revelation from the lord of the universe , and that it is the truth from the lord of the universe . god is a guide to the believers .
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
will ye not then receive admonition ?
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
so exalted be allah , the true king ! there is no god but he , the lord of the throne of honour !
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
have you not seen those who have passed away , the people of the book , and say : if you are afflicted by these , we shall not be able to do so , nor shall we be able to do so . god is the witness of the liars .
your companion is neither astray , neither errs ,
and he brought down from their forts , the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , then go back on what they said , must free a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are exhorted to do . god is aware of the things you do .
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave the prophethood and the book to his descendants . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
my people , do according to your position , and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . you are watching .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
beautified is the life of the world for those who disbelieve , and they scoff at those who believe ; but those who fear allah shall be above them on the day of resurrection ; and allah provideth for whomsoever he will without measure .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
nay , we are deprived .
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
or , build a direction of the mother where the heavens are given to the heavens , or the high heavens , or the sky , in which the sky will be raised , so say , ‘ immaculate is my lord ! ’ say , ‘ immaculate is my lord ! ’
o you who believe ! fulfill your commitments . the animals of grazing livestock are permitted for you , except that which is recited to you , while you are in pilgrim sanctity . god decrees whatever he wills .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
or do they have gods who can defend them against us ? they are not able to help themselves , nor can they be protected from us .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you demand ?
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we shall marry them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
those who are afraid of the earth , shall be made to go on their hearts ; then they shall be made to look on their hearts ; but if they were to be shown the truth , they would not have believed in our signs ; but if they were to be guided , it is only for them to reject our signs .
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
wavering between , neither to these nor to those ; and whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
they said : by allah ! you know we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
we are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you ,
there is a salutation for the people of the way , which is the way of god . it is the same for you , and the same is a source of heart . god is the rich and the most merciful .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses , so he forgot .
there is not one of you but shall pass over it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
if there were in them gods other than allah , they would surely have fallen apart . so glory be to allah , the lord of the throne , above what they attribute to him !
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
arise and warn ,
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
he said : he says : a heifer not trained to till the soil or the fields ; sound and without blemish . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . so they said : now thou bringest the truth !
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
then they departed , to the people where they had been sent down . they have no knowledge at all , but they have no knowledge in the least . moses said , if what you wanted is true .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be received therein with greetings andpeace .
surely they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ; pay heed ! he encompasses everything .
enter ye the gates of hell , to dwell therein : and evil isabode of the arrogant !
the adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress ; and the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater . that is forbidden to the believers .
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
we strengthened his kingdom , and gave him wisdom and decisive speech .
andfir'aun , who had pegs ?
we have given this discourse to the people of understanding . is there anyone who pointed to the same way ? one who pointed to the law of this book was rightly guided .
o believers , expend of what we have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession . those who deny the truth are the unjust .
his wife who stood near , laughed as we gave her the good news of isaac , and after isaac of jacob .
they say , ‘ what ! is it the sign of the clear one among the signs of allah ? ’ say , ‘ yes , indeed , the signs of the clear book is . ’ it is said , ‘ indeed , it is a clear prophesy . ’
and let him share my task
and leg will be joined with another leg
how many harmdoing villages have we shattered and replaced them with another nation .
say , he is able to send down upon you affliction from above you or from beneath your feet or to confuse yousects and make you taste the tyranny one of another . see how we display the signs so that they may understand .
so , o dear prophet , when we have said to the people , “ your lord knows the people and what you have observed , and it is made for you to follow the people in peace , and it is the same for you to have no faith . ”
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you do .
we know best what they will say . the most perceptive of them will say , you stayed only one day .
the king of men ,
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
the word of god is true , and he establishes religion in his religion , and do not follow the tradition of god , and keep your duty to him , and give the alms ,
he said to those around him , “ do you not hear ? ”
give just measure , and cause no loss .
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with the qur'an a great striving .
or did we create the angels females , while they were witnesses ?
those who have despaired of the truth will be in speech . if they have any patience , they will have no one to be seen about it . they have the power to do so . this is the law of the law of the past .
and thy lord do thou magnify !
but whoever of you is obedient to allah and his messenger and does good deeds , we shall give her a twofold reward , and we will have prepared for her a noble provision .
o wives of the prophet ! you are not like any other women . if you fear allah , do not be too obliging in your speech , lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire , but speak honourable words .
but when allah had decided to do so , they will surely have fear in the earth , o people , but you will be repaid by the means of the life of the world . then you will be brought back to life for all your deeds .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is ever forgiving , merciful .
about all what they used to do .
o ye who believe ! be ye disbelievers in allah 's way , as the name of allah : isa son of mary , isa son of mary : ‘ who is it that will be a sign to allah , so that we may be the rejectors of the believers ? then , we have made them a harvestreaped , so that they became a tyrant .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what allah has given them in his largesse . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate .
had allah willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
praise be to god who has given me ishmael and isaac in my old age . surely my lord hears all supplications .
now we have no intercessors ,
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
that is because you made a mockery of allah 's communications and were deluded by the life of the world . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , peace . and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
that is because allah is the truth , and because he gives life to the dead , and because he is able to do all things .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , lo ! you come forth .
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
woe to you !
and i know not ; perhaps it may be a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been that a word had gone forth before from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
the threatened hour is nigh .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
nay , but those who disbelieve are in false pride and schism .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , they are the loyal and the martyrs , with their lord . for them is their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and deny our verses , they are owners of hell-fire .
he surely thought he would never return .
lo ! he verily is able to return him
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
i convey to you the messages of my lord and advise you ; and i know from allah what you do not know .
depart unto thatwhich ye used to deny ;
then we raised the children of israel through the sea , and they came to a people who were devoted to their gods . they said : o moses , make us a pattern , like those of the idol-worshippers . you are ignorant , he replied .
those who disbelieve , their wealth and their children will be better than the way of allah . and they will soon be made to look on the disbelievers .
look , how they invent a lie against allah ! and sufficient is that as a manifest sin .
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to shade , and said , “ my lord ! i am in need of whatever good you may send down for me . ”
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and one of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth , and he is a liar .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire andbrass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
and ask forgiveness of your lord , and then repent unto him . lo ! my lord is merciful , loving .
they said : if thou desistest not , o lut ! thou shalt surely be of those driven forth .
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , without any doubt , shall have no argument with the guilt ; this is the reward of allah ; and thus doth allah seal up all who believe .
near which is the garden of repose .
and we have placed in them a place of that which we have sent down upon them , a decree of their own , or in order that it may be a clear decree between them , and in the morning they are not afraid .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them in the land , so that we destroyed you with the like of it , so that the inhabitants of the garden may have been decided ?
what they concealed before hasappeared to them . and even if they were returned , they would return to what they were forbidden , and they are liars .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
the dwelling of suchis hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
moses said , pharaoh , i am a messenger from the lord of the universe ,
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
surely in that is a sign for believers .
so hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee . lo ! thou art on a right path .
say thou : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the invisible and the visible ! thou wilt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they have been differing .
so the shriek seized them at sunrise .
but the word is revealed to him . no word is revealed to him . it is only he who calls us . it is the command of him . say : 'you are witness to what we have submitted .
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before , and you will never find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and he made the throne a spring for you , so that he may call you to account for which you were doing . but if the unbelievers remain bent on denying the truth , they say , “ this is nothing but clear magic . ”
and he shows you his signs ; so which sign of allah will you deny ?
and by the night when it darkens ,
had they believed and been righteous , the reward from god would have been better , if they only knew .
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
for you therein is much fruit from which you will eat .
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord is the doer of what he intends .
o people , listen to the truth , indeed , those whom you invoke besides allah can not listen to any one . if they do so , they will be able to do so . and they will be unable to speak .
wealth and children are the ornament of this world . but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for hope .
the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . a promise binding upon us ; indeed , we will do it .
and of mankind is he whose speech about the life of this world calls you , and he calls allah to witness as to what is in his heart , yet he is the fiercest of opponents .
and hell is the promised place for them all .
and on the day when he will gather them and that which they worship besides allah , he will say , ‘ was it you who led astray these servants of mine , or did they themselves stray from the way ? ’
and the evils that they earned will appear unto them , and that whereat they used to scoff will surround them .
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and each soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you been given immunity in the scriptures ?
those who have despaired of the truth will be in speech . if they have any patience , they will have no one to be seen about it . they have the power to do so . this is the law of the law of the past .
but he who has been given the truth will say , “ woe to you ! do you deny me ? ”
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
fight them . god will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
verily the hypocrites shall be in the lowest abyss of the fire ; and thou wilt not find for them a helper .
there is a ban on the contrary after this , no more than the torah that he has made . to each other is the result of their deeds . if they had thought , they would surely have to go back to each other .
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
verily , in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
never cometh there unto them a new reminder from their lord but they listen to it while they play ,
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
never-ending and unrestricted ,
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye do not like advisors .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is unlawful , in order to impute lies to god . those who invent lies against god will never prosper .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
wherein they will live forever . it is the true promise of god . he is majestic and all-wise .
and allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers while you know nothing . and he gave you hearing , sight , and hearts that you might give thanks .
and how the mountains were firmly fixed ?
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
hearts will be throbbing ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
commemorate the people of the book . there is a mention of the book , in arabic . it is the speech of the book , in which there is no guide . the words of god is true . they say , god has the knowledge of the unseen . he has the knowledge of the unseen .
and those in whose wealth there is a known right .
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about the clear signs . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , be ! and he was .
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves ; the merciful has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
if you ask them for help , you will certainly be your enemies . if you are telling the truth , it would be better for you , but if you do not , then it will be said to god , the true one .
if it were the truth we shall bring forth for them a term until a term appointed , say : what is the matter with it that the day of judgment will be ? it will be a day whereon they will be called out .
who creates , then makes complete ,
but if they turn away , say : i have proclaimed to you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
he said , 'you cast . ' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and intimidated them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
let man consider his food .
the word of your lord is perfected in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
, tell them , the death from which you run away will certainly come to you . then you will be returned to the knower of the unseen and the seen , and he will tell you what you used to do .
so they could neither scale it , nor could they pierce it .
he said : lookest thou ! when we betook ourselves to the rock , then i forgot the fish ; and naught but satan made me forget to mention it , and it took its way into the sea a marvel .
with those who were made to say , we nazarenes a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they were reminded . so we make them taste the day of remorse , and god will inform them of all that they have done .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
and i will surely call you to account , and to realise ; and i will say to those who deny the truth , “ i will inform you of it , so that you may look at allah ’ s command ; and whoever ascribes partners to allah is certainly upon a great punishment . ”
and by this inviolable city , mecca .
he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
who say , when a misfortune striketh them : lo ! we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
and they say , “ if allah had willed to make the polytheists he would have taken us in his divinity , and we had not been forbidden ” ; so those who were before them , “ do so , with our forefathers , upon us , so that you may be just in the way . ”
and whosoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , shall enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after receiving the ancient divine testaments .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
when their brother salih said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
though they will be within sight of one another . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
if you call on them , they can not hear your prayer , and if they heard , they would not answer you ; and on the day of resurrection they will deny your associating . and none can inform you like him who is aware .
and weigh with a balance straight .
i am for you an honest messenger .
so they returned tothemselves and said , indeed , you are the wrongdoers .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
we have sent you with the truth to proclaim good news and to warn . never has there been a nation but a warner has passed in it .
and reckon not thou those slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ,
o ye men of jinns ! are ye men of jinns and men before you come unto them ? of my revelations , the revelations of my lord , and say : verily we are the witnesses thereof , and the truth is of the infidels .
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
do you not see that we have sent devils upon the unbelievers who prick them ?
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
and of the wealth and the children of the wealth are things that we have provided for you , and do not make the exception of the death before it comes , and say , “ o my lord ! oh , i wish you are a muslim . ”
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
had allah willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
then do not place me , lord , with the wrongdoers .
nor any food save filthy corruption .
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy ; if you are suffering , they are indeed suffering as you are suffering , but you expect from allah that which they do not hope ; and allah is knowing , wise .
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
your religion is but one religion , and i am your lord , therefore fear me .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
and we have placed in them a place of that which we have sent down upon them , a decree of their own , or in order that it may be a clear decree between them , and in the morning they are not afraid .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
by allah , we have sent messengers before you to other nations . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , so he is their patron today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and when i inspired the disciples : believe in me and my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
and we have created above you seven paths , and we are never unmindful of creation .
and when moses and his people were calling upon his people , he said , ‘ bring it down ! ’ and we said to his people , ‘ give a spring spring . indeed , it is a spring . indeed , it is a guidance . ’
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
he disposed the sun and the moon for you , constant , and he disposed the night and the day ,
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
accursed be the conjecturers
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his verses .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
those who spend in weal and woe , and those who restrainanger and pardon people ; and allah loves the doers of good .
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
those who disbelieve say : 'believe in the message that has been revealed to you . if the harmdoers say : 'if you are truthful , we would say , if you are truthful '
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
my wealth has not availed me .
then he called upon his lord : these are a people given to sin .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
those who are upright in the way of allah are those who are fought against the way of allah with their wealth and their lives . not at all . indeed , allah is the munificent and munificent .
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
o you who have faith ! take care of your own souls . he who strays can not harm you if you are guided . to allah will return all that you have done .
his wealth did not avail him , nor did what he acquired .
then god caused his tranquillity to descend upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers ; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them . and even if they were to help them , they would turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain . nay , it is what you were asking to hasten . it is a wind wherein is a painful torment .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and when they will contend one with another in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , “ alas – if only we had obeyed allah and obeyed the noble messenger ! ”
if it were the truth we shall bring forth for them a term until a term appointed , say : what is the matter with it that the day of judgment will be ? it will be a day whereon they will be called out .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
and he taught adam the names , all of them ; then he presented them to the angels , and said , “ tell me the names of these , if you are truthful . ”
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given only a little knowledge .
he said to the angels , “ i am in the earth , a sign . the angels say , ‘ is there a sign for you in this matter ? ’ ‘ and what is the matter with the guilty ? indeed , we will inform you about what you do not know . ’
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
such were 'ad . they gainsaid the signs of their lord , and disobeyed his messengers , and followed the bidding of every insolent tyrant .
they made for him what he willed , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and stationary kettles . : work ye , house of david , with thanks ! but few of my servants are grateful .
we have not taught himpoetry , nor is it meet for him . this is only a remembrance and a clear holy reading
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
now that you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides god , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will prepare for you your affair .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
and ask forgiveness of your lord , and then repent unto him . lo ! my lord is merciful , loving .
in our eyes they were of the chosen , virtuous people .
a grouphe guided , and a part justly disposed in error ; indeed they took the devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they are guided .
who have divided themselves into various religious sects , each one happy with their own belief .
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
in gardens , questioning
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ; you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
so when they took him away , and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well , and we inspired in him : you will surely inform them of this their affair while they do not perceive .
and he said : surely i am sick .
god wants to make it clear to you and guide you in the ways of those before you , and to turn towards you ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
on the day when we will gather the righteous towards the most merciful , as guests .
most surely this is a manifest trial .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
and you will surely find people to be guided by the religion of those who believe , and you will see those who have ascribed partners to allah , and you will see those who have submitted .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is well aware of what they do .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
we have already recounted to you what we have forbidden to the jews . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and we rained down on them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
they were about to hound you out of the land to expel you from it , and then they would not have stayed after you but a little .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
then a welcome of inferno .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
we will certainly make clear to you clear signs , clear signs . the measuring of his people is the just . so make clear to the people of the book , in order to make clear to the people . god is majestic and all-merciful .
hallowed be the lord of the heavens and the earth , the lord of the throne , from that which they ascribe !
the men of believing women , men and women alike , both men and women , and men , women , and women -- and men , women , and women -- both men , women , and women -- surely , we have given them a mighty wage , from god , a great reward .
who avertedfrom the way of allah and sought to make itdeviant while they were disbelievers in the hereafter .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
and when he did not make the opponents to come into his presence , they said , “ did you not consider that your father has been dropped with him ? ” so he made them quit of that our promise ; and he is the best of judges .
and grudgingwhen good comes his way
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is allah ’ s judgement ? yet in spite of that , they turn their backsand they are not believers .
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
those who associated others with allah in his divinity , say : if allah had so willed , they could not have been able to have any place of worship nor could we have worshipped any of them . but allah did not make the example of those who have been concealing .
so he wateredfor them ; then he turned back to shade , and said , “ my lord ! i am in need of whatever good you may send down for me . ”
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to feed on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest a near punishment seize you .
you are now the best people brought forth formankind . you enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong and believe in allah . had the people of the book believed it would be better for them . but most of them are transgressors .
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
anxious when an ill befalls him
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back .
wesaid : fear not ! surely , you will have the upper hand .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
thus did we retribute them for their ingratitude . and none do we retribute in this manner except the utterly ungrateful .
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall not speak .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
you will recognize in their faces the freshness of bliss .
and most of the ancients before them went astray .
then , , the word is not open to you , so that you may give the life of this book to the right way , and do not follow the tradition of what you have been permitted , except for the cause of god . in that case , you will not be able to receive the like of it . what is the matter with god , for those who have been given the lie to god . this is the law of god .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of the things that were forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord so fear allah and obey me .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , “ alas – if only we had obeyed allah and obeyed the noble messenger ! ”
is it not a sign to them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
when the night covered him over , he saw a star . he said , this is my lord . but when it set , he said , i love not those that set .
we have ordained phases for the moon until finally it becomes like an old date-stalk .
my people , i ask of you no reward for this . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
for a known extent .
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third . they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
evil indeed itis as an abode and as a place to dwell .
they say , ‘ what ! is it the sign of the clear one among the signs of allah ? ’ say , ‘ yes , indeed , the signs of the clear book is . ’ it is said , ‘ indeed , it is a clear prophesy . ’
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
not equal are the owners of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the owners of the garden ! they are the achievers !
, tell them , the fire of god is true . say , god will give me a double share of hell . it is only a result of the same for those who have faith . if the people of the believing men and the women had also submitted themselves to god , their share will be doubled . god has the knowledge of the two groups .
and you see , that you may see the people in this world 's life as well as the means of the life of this world . there is no one of them to say . each one of them will say to it . there is any one of them who can not tell them . god is well aware of what you do .
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
who will enter the great fire ,
no word can be given to you a share of the quran . it is no laws of revelation , which is revealed to us . it is in our power that they will be reminded of it , or in the heavens or in the sky a great share .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
the people who lived before you had also done evil in the land , and those who had been committing evil in the earth , except for a little while , except for a short time . they will be given by the command of god , so they will be among the sinners .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . all shall come to him humbled .
o you who believe ! do not take the jews and the christians for allies . they are allies of one another . whoever of you takes them for a friend , he is one of them . god does not guide the unjust people .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
they are the ones who have lost their souls , and what they forged has forsaken them .
shall he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and the a-ad , and fir'awn ; and the brethren of lut .
and if they belie thee , then a party of the followers of the right will be shown unto thee . say thou : there will be no fear with me , nor will ye be able to dispute with me .
and tall palm-trees with clusters of dates
and say , ‘ do what you do , allah will see your deeds and his messenger and the believers , and you will be returned to the knower of the sensible and the unseen , and he will inform you of what you used to do . ’
say : 'have you considered the provision allah has sent down for you , and you have made some of it lawful and some unlawful ? ' say : 'has allah given you leave , or do you forge a lie against allah ? '
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may trouble you . the unbelievers are indeed your manifest enemies .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
and those who disbelieve say : hearken not unto this qur'an and babble therein , haply ye may overcome .
the sabbath was only prescribed for those who differed about it . your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that about which they differed .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikes , and seven others dry . o courtiers , give me my vision , if you can interpret visions . ”
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
they said , “ these two are magicians , who want to expel you from your land by their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
and if you fear a breach between the two , appoint an arbiter from his people and an arbiter from her people ; if they both desire reconciliation , allah will cause their reconciliation . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what allah has given them in his largesse . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
those are the ones to whom we gave the book , al-hukm , and prophethood . if these disbelieve in it , we have indeed entrusted it to a people who are not disbelievers in it .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but a forgery :
, call to mind , as you are commanded , as you are commanded to follow in the way of god . say , i have been commanded to believe in the revelations of god , and say , i have been commanded to be the ones who do not believe in the law of god . it is only for us to act in your duty to us . god has the power to do so .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer -- verily we shall not waste the hire of the rectifiers .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been oppressed , and then fought and remained patient – indeed your lord thereafter is oft forgiving , most merciful .
and at night . do you not understand ?
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadda or suwa – or yaghuth or yauq or nasr . ”
and on the day when we gather them all together , then say to the polytheists , “ where are those partnerswhom you professed ? ”
your god is one god . as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , their hearts are in denial , and they are arrogant .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
they will answer : we were not of those who prayed ,
have they not heard the story of those who were given the lie to before them , and the people of noah , and the people of abraham , and the people of tubba ? but they were not unjust to them ; they wronged themselves .
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs . then they would not find any protector or helper .
and relieve you of the burden
the proud leaders of his people said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had believed , “ do you know that saleh has been sent by his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
allah has set forth the example of the people of noah and the people of lot to the unbelievers who had become two of the faithless . they were both of the same for the unbelievers . they will be told , enter the fire which will be the home of hell .
and they will approach one another , inquiring .
the assembly of pharaoh 's people said : 'will you allow moses and his nation to corrupt in the land and to forsake you and your gods ' he replied : 'we will put their sons to death and spare their women , surely we are conquerors over them '
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they ask for goodwill , then they are not of those who are allowed to appease .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
so that they may understand my speech .
have you heard the story of the overwhelming event ?
and when he showed them to you as few in your eyes , and he made you appear few in their eyes , so that allah might accomplish a matter already ordained , and to allah all matters are returned .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers and make no distinction between any of them , to those , allah will give their wages ; and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
on the day when their faces are turned about in the fire , they will say , “ alas – if only we had obeyed allah and obeyed the noble messenger ! ”
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
god will certainly die and give up the life of the hearts of the faithful in what is in the hearts of god , and who remember the way of god , and who will be the greatest ones in the way of god . so who will be the greatest losers ?
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
for your lord will have commanded it .
then he fashioned him in due proportion , and breathed into him something of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little do you thank .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
worship none but allah , and his offspring , and the needy and the traveller , and the relatives , the near of kin ; and the kindred , in truth , are near . allah does not love the extravagant .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
as such , we never sent a warner before you to a village , but the wealthy among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
the righteous shall be those who were afraid of their lord , and those who are on the day of judgment , when the gates of the heavens and the earth will be made to reach the ground as the torah and the close of the angels . they will be admitted to paradise wherein they will live forever .
and purify your clothes ,
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate .
say , “ are you the people who are given a lie to god in the least that you shall be rewarded by him ? this is what god has made to be upon the one upon whom god has cursed . they are the most wicked , the most wicked .
on the day when we will gather the righteous towards the most merciful , as guests .
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their talk secret .
a. l. r. a book which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mayst bring forth mankind from darkness unto light , by the leave of their lord , unto the path of the mighty , the praiseworthy .
said he , 'get thee down from hence ! it is not for thee to wax proud here ; so go thou forth ; surely thou art of the abject ones . '
believers , have fear of god and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double share of his mercy and will give you a light by which you will walk . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
we created not the heavens , the earth , and all between them , merely insport :
and they say : the most beneficenthas begotten a son ! hallowed be he ! aye ! they are bondmen honoured .
and remember we saved you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them in full their wages ; and allah does not like the unjust .
so leave them in their intoxication till a time .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
and we delivered him andlutto the land which we had blessed for all people .
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
by the much-frequented house ,
that is because allah would never change a favour which he has bestowed upon a people until they change what is within themselves , and because allah is hearing , knowing .
and who is more unjust than one who is reminded of his lord ’ s signs , then he turns away from them ? indeed , we will take vengeance upon the guilty .
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : a forbidding ban !
the words of god is true . you can see the prayers of the day of judgment . the judgement is only with god . the matter is a decree for the disbelievers . this is the law of god . what is the matter with the unbelievers ? god has the power to do so .
your ally is only allah , his messenger , and the believers who establish prayer and give zakah , and they bow .
then he looked up at the stars ,
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
and indeed i am oft forgiving for him who repents and believes and does good deeds , and then continues in guidance .
our lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but clear magic .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
and why should we not believe in allah and in the truth that has come to us , and we yearn for our lord to admit us among the righteous ?
they are all my enemies , not so the lord of the universe ,
, make full coats of mail and calculatethe links , and workrighteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do .
they will say : our lord ! our misfortune prevailed over us , and we were an erring people .
it is god who has made the earth a cradle for you and place the earth to swallow . it is the sustenance of god . he is the lord of the universe .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
wesaid : fear not ! surely , you will have the upper hand .
and to you is the true word ; and if you be shown the truth , it is only for you to have a right path ; so when the promise of the promise is to come , it is only to you that the believers are at the like of the first time ; then , let the believers deny it .
that , so taste it , andthat for the disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
know that your possessions and children are a temptation for you and that god possesses immense reward .
and they say : there is naught but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time ; and they have no knowledge of that , but they have no knowledge .
i will fill hell with you and with all those among them who follow you . ”
obeyed thereand trustworthy .
and we did not give any any share of the punishment of his men , but it was a snake , and we sent it upon him from whom we had sent it , and we made it a herald of the hidden , and it was revealed , and it was revealed . and allah did not oppress them .
not equal are the owners of the fire and the fellows of the garden . the owners of the garden ! they are the achievers !
but if you can not do it , and you can never do it , then fear the firewhose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the unbelievers .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
say , “ those who have spoken a point of the truth , will be called to you , so that you will be called upon to account – or do so be , or submit to them ; and if you turn away , then there will be a great reward for you , or if you turn away . ”
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers in the land .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves ; the merciful has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
have the people of faith in the faith of allah , their wishful belief , so that they may follow the religion of allah on account of the day of judgment , as the means of allah , to remain in it , as a result of their deeds , and many of them became transgressors ?
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; therein for them shall be spouses purified , and we shall admit them to deepening shade .
they said : if thou desistest not , o lut ! thou shalt surely be of those driven forth .
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him you shall be gathered .
such is the paradise which we shall cause those of our servants who have been god-fearing to inherit .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
allah has absolved you from your oaths . allah is your guardian , the knowing , the wise .
and we brought the others close to that place .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and when allah has made you successors on the earth after the people of the world and the people of the world to build for you the ways of the world , then the earth shall be set open for the words of allah . so remember the blessing of allah , and do mischief in the land .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was doing wrong ? so it liethin ruins , and how many a well abandoned and how many a castle fortifred !
and that is not difficult for allah .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or any helper .
then there will come a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
, o jesus , son of mary , remember me , my son , when i am a messenger of the faithful , when i am a the messenger of the faithful , when i have spoken to them by the means of the faithful , when i have been in the matter of the people of the bookand the injeel , when the torah and the gospel are recorded at the end of the law . this is the right course .
or do those who do evil deeds think they can outrun us ? evil is their judgment !
who created me , and heguides me .
these are the limitsallah , and whoever obeys allah and his messenger , he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow , to abide in them , and that is the great attainment .
allah made it but a message of hope , and that your hearts might be at rest . victory cometh only by the help of allah . lo ! allah is mighty , wise .
the people of the book are the ones who have received the book . it has been revealed to you what has been revealed to you . they are the people of the whole book . say , i am commanded to worship god and to him you will all return .
they await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
what ! do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ bring us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful ! ’
those who disbelieve and bar from god 's way , god will send their works astray .
so we delivered him and those with him in the laden ark .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
they see it to be far off ,
in the life to come , they will certainly be the losers .
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs . then they would not find any protector or helper .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
and if they call thee a liar , messengerswere denied before thee . and unto allah are returned all affairs .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : commit ye indecency while ye see ?
and his are the ships reared aloft in the sea like mountains .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what ismost gracious ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which thou commandest us ? and it increases them in aversion .
we have sent down to you a book that mentions you . do you not understand ?
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
surely , those who disbelieve in our signs , they are about to believe in our signs . what is the matter with them , who will be better , or the one who will be honoured ? god is well aware of what you do .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
that is because they believed , then disbelieved , therefore their hearts are sealed , so they do not understand .
this quran guides to the most upright way and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that they will have a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they meet their day which they are promised ,
indeed , theselove the immediate and leave behind them a heavy day .
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
by the clouds which are heavily loaded with water ,
“ go to pharaoh—he has transgressed . ”
the likeness of the two parties is that of a two male point . the two . the matter is true . so , your father , is true . it was the true news of the truth that you have received .
this is indeed the supreme triumph ! ’
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
when he came to it , a voice called out : moses !
and if they had followed the teachings of the torah and the gospel , and what has been sent down to them by their lord , they would surely have enjoyedfrom the heavens above and the earth below their feet .
when the oceans are gushed forth ,
do they think that by increasing their wealth and children
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they boasted and exulted at the knowledge they had , of what they had mocked .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
and a few from the latter ones .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , it is they who are the liars .
then , let him call upon his council ,
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall not speak .
on that day we shall present hell to the disbelievers , plain to view ,
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death . likewise you will be resurrected .
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day .
and let them not divert thee from the revelations of allah after they have been sent down unto thee . and call unto thy lord , and be not of those who ascribe partners .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
there surely is an oath for thinking man .
if allah were to take mankind to task for their wrong-doing , he would not leave any living being on the earth ; he gives them respite for an appointed time ; then when their term comes they shall not be able to delayan hour nor can they advance it .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the sustainer .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
they said : o nuh ! you have disputed with us and lengthened dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
verily that is how we shall deal with sinners .
therein maidens restraining their glances , untouched before them by any man or jinn --
hallowed be he who hath created all the pairs of that which the earth groweth , and of themselves and of that which they know not .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
to warn whosoever liveth , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
and if you show the victory to allah , then indeed , allah has made them victorious , and when the disbelievers have turned them away , he was disregardful of the two , and said , ‘ do not be sad . allah has turned what you did not know . allah is the almighty , the wise . ’
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a balance between the two ;
when moses said to his people , god commands you to sacrifice a cow . they replied , do you make a mockery of us ? he answered , god forbid that i should be one of the ignorant ones .
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
they plotted against him , but we made them the lowest .
they said : if he should make a bequest , then surely a female carries the burden of your own sin . then he said : be ye a man who is innocent of what is said . and allah is informed of what ye say .
or , do the people of the towns feel secure from our punishment coming to them in the morning while they play ?
those who denied shu'ayb became as though they had never lived there . those who called shu'aib a liar , they were the losers .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
good tidings and a warning . but most of them turn away , so they do not listen .
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may testify .
and those who disbelieve will say : our lord ! show us those who led us astray from among the jinn and the men that we may trample them under our feet , so that they may be of the lowest .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and if thou ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone , and not for other people , then long for death if you are truthful .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
these are the verses of allah . we recite them to you in truth , and indeed , you are one of the messengers .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
fleeing -- before a lion ?
and multiplied therein corruption .
and they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and we had taught him knowledge from ourselves .
and hath made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
they descend on every lying , wicked person ,
ask those of our messengers we sent before you : “ did we appoint gods besides the most gracious to be worshiped ? ”
and how can you take it back , when you have been intimate with one another , and they have taken from you a solemn covenant ?
these are the verses of allah which we recite to you in truth . then in what statement after allah and his signs will they believe ?
and ease my task for me ;
surely those who accuse chaste , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us and be among its witnesses . ”
and those who followed will say : if only we had another chance , we would have denounced our leaders . thus will allah show them their deeds as regrets for them . and they will never emerge from the fire .
so we inflicted retribution on them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
look ! they fold their breasts , to hide from him . but when they cover themselves with their garments , he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he knows what lies within the hearts .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , they are the loyal and the martyrs , with their lord . for them is their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and deny our verses , they are owners of hell-fire .
the people of 'ad too rejected the truth . how terrible was my torment and my warning .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a boy , whose name is john . we have not made before anyone his namesake .
nor do you worship what i worship .
say , ‘ it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ’
and whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul , then seeketh pardon of allah , will find allah forgiving , merciful .
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
and when your lord proclaimed , “ if you give thanks , i will give you more , but if you are ungrateful , my punishment is severe . ”
o mankind , a proof has come to you from your lord , and we have sent down to you a clear light .
and we made therein gardens of palms and vines , and we caused springs to gush forth therein ,
build the ark under our eyes and as we instruct . do not plead with me concerning those who have wronged . they will certainly be drowned .
lo ! those who dispute with us concerning the revelations , they dispute about allah 's revelations . they are not the ones to argue on account of it . they are the ones who take heed for themselves . so allah is the hearer , the seer .
by the raiders at dawn ,
believers , do not be presumptuous with god . the words of god is true . do not speak a sound word of sound words . the words of god are certainly true . do not make a mistake .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
for the like of this let the workers work .
say , have you considered about the things they call upon besides god ? have you seen what you have worshipped other than god ? have you received the tradition of god , or are the people given to you ? no , the unjust will not have any happiness .
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke beside allah another conjecture , they follow only surmise , and they follow only a guess .
then we raised you up after your death , so that you might be grateful .
if you impugn , thennations have impugnedbefore you , and the apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
and iblees had already confirmed through them his assumption , and they followed him , all except a party of the believers .
and by him who created the male and female ,
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
which none but sinners eat .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase their sins , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
those who shun the worship of idols and turn to allah in repentance , for them are glad tidings . so give good news to my servants ,
so be patient , indeed , the promise of allah is true . and whether we show yousome part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
how many a town have we destroyed while it was doing wrong ? so it liethin ruins , and how many a well abandoned and how many a castle fortifred !
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
those who believed in our signs , and were muslims .
which of you is afflicted with madness .
and musa said : if ye disbelive , - ye and all those who are on the earth-then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord is the doer of what he intends .
and indeed , it is we who give life and cause death , and we are the inheritor .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
those to whom we have given the book know himas they know their own children . but those who have lost their souls will not believe .
he said : he says : a heifer not trained to till the soil or the fields ; sound and without blemish . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . so they said : now thou bringest the truth !
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and verily , your lord will gather them together . indeed , he is all-wise , all-knowing .
and follow not the command of al-musrifun ,
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and a great kingdom .
and those who , when they are reminded of the signs of their lord , fall not deaf and blind thereat .
god has begotten children . they are liars .
then lo ! this day theyare sharers in the doom .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
indeed in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
moses came to you with clear proofs , yet you worshipped the calf after him , and you were unjust .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will exclaim therein for destruction .
so eat and drink and be consoled . and if thou shouldst see any mortal , say : lo ! i have vowed a fast unto the beneficent , and so i shall not speak to any man today .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
vision comprehends him not , and he comprehendsvision ; and he is the knower of subtleties , the aware .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
to him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth . and those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , such are they who will be the losers .
and it will be said : this day we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . and those who are near him are not too proud to worship him , nor do they grow weary .
are you more difficult to create , or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils ,
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the lowest .
and those who are in the fire will say to the keepers of hell , “ call to your lord to lessen our suffering for one day . ”
and god was gracious to us , and guarded us against the chastisement of the burning wind ;
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and this is a book we have sent down , blessed , verifying that which is before it , that you may warn the mother of cities and those around it . those who believe in the hereafter believe in it , and they are dedicated to their prayers .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
the heavens are unveiled ,
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
and if allah touch thee with affliction there is no reverser thereof but he ; and if he touch thee with good , then he hath power over all things .
and the way of allah is true . so do not follow the earth , and that which is in the earth , so that you shall know the truth , and that allah is the knower of it .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought before him .
those who are given the sacred book follow the recitation of the messenger . they have been inspired in the story of god . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you , if you want to reason .
and if we willed , we could have madeof you angels succeedingon the earth .
the unbelievers among the people of noah said , “ we see you only as one of our own people . do not see those who follow you , except those who follow you ; we do not think that you are lying . ”
and whomsoever we grant long life , we reverse him in creation ; so will they not understand ?
they will say , indeed , you used to come at us from the right .
the day they see it , as if they had not tarriedexcept an afternoon or a morning .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
they are those for whom there is nothing in the hereafter but fire ; and vain are the deeds they did therein , and their works are null .
shall he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them who disbelieved .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
by your lord , we will question them all
like satan when he says to man : disbelieve in allah ; but when he disbelieves , he says , i am clear of you ; i fear god , the lord of the universe .
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith - we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not diminish unto them aught of their work . every man is for what he hath earned .
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fruitless .
except for a proclamation from allah and his messages . he who disobeys allah and his messenger will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein for a long time .
and when they will contend one with another in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
your god is one ,
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him in his divinity ; and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
when paradise is brought near ,
the arrogant leaders of the great people were in the land who were afflicting them with the evil ones . they are only guessing in the land except for those who have gone before them . you will not be able to set up the tradition of god in the past .
is the one who knows all that is in the hands of their own book ? they have set different groups with god . say , “ bring it upon those who have rejected the truth , and say , “ bring it upon those who are bent on denying the truth . god has the knowledge of the disbelievers . ”
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
the jews say : ezra is the son of god . the christians say , the son of god is the son of god . that is what they say with their tongues before their very eyes . how perverse they are !
and our duty is but plain conveyance .
and set thy face to the religion , a man of pure faith , and be thou not of the idolaters .
but as for me , he is god , my lord , and i do not associate with my lord anyone .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
and good is unto thee in the world to come ; we have surely guided them unto thee , and the ways of doom will be said unto thee : my doom will be a temptation unto thee ; and anon i shall make unto thee the hire of the god-fearing .
so that he may punish the hypocrites and the pagans who have evil suspicions about god . it is they who are evil and have lost their souls . he has prepared for them hell , a terrible place to live .
herein are really signs for those who discern .
he said : surely i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , have no fear or grief . we will save you and your family , except your wife , who will remain behind .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then he brings it forth in the earth ? then , it will be said , it will be , and it will be a different thing in the same .
but their brethren , they draw them into error , and then they do not spare .
o prophet , recall what time the son of maryam has been set upon a true son : fear thou ; be thou not loud with them , but keep on behalf of allah , that haply he may be one of the extravagant .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and watch them , for they will soon see .
god does not wrong an atom 's weight , but if there is a good deed , he doubles it , and gives from him a great reward .
aaron had already told them before , o my people , you are being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my order .
does not man see that we created him from a drop of semen ? yet he becomes an open contender ,
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . as for such , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
the eye did not turn aside , nor did it exceed the limit .
and we admitted him into our mercy ; verily he was of the righteous .
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of the things that were forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord so fear allah and obey me .
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , we will surely remove from them their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back .
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
and left for him among the later folk
that is because they disliked what god revealed , so he nullified their deeds .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
he said : be thatbetween me and thee : whichever of the two terms i fulfil , there shall be no injustice to me ; and allah is a witness over what we say .
did he not make their plan go wrong ?
and on the day when he will gather them all together , he will say to the angels : did these worship you ?
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
nay , they say , medleys of dream ! - nay , he hath invented it ! nay , he is a poet ! so let him bring us a sign , even as the ancient ones were sent as messengers .
so set out with your family in a part of the night and walk behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth where you are commanded .
warn them of the day of regret , when the matter will be concluded ; yet they are heedless and unbelieving .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
we created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days , and no fatigue touched us .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
they think the confederates have not departed ; and if the confederates should come , they would wish they were in the desertsamong the bedouins , seeking news about you . and if they were among you , they would fight but little .
when the ten-months pregnant camels shall be abandoned ,
and winked at one another as they passed by them ;
and on that day , they will be guided to the people who believe in allah , the path of allah , is that he will be guided to allah 's way . then , remember how was the time of those who have been warned .
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
then hell is the shelter .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
will be the food of the sinful , -
so let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts , divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
indeed , for the righteous is attainment -
that is some of the wisdom your lord has revealed to you . do not set up another god besides god , or you will be thrown into hell , rebuked and banished .
that they will indeed receivehelp ,
and those who do not bear false witness , and if they pass by idle talk , pass by with dignity .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
they used to say :
o my servants who believe ! indeed my earth is spacious – therefore worship me alone .
so these their habitations lie deserted now because of their iniquities . verily in this is a sign for people who know .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , even though you were unaware before it .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and there is not a thing but itstreasuresare with us ; and we send it down only in precise measure .
and it was said : enter the word of mine . so she went astray , and he said : my lord ! lo ! i have taken a thing with the lord of the worlds . so he said : my lord ! verily i have been so of the lord of the worlds .
and the shade of black smoke ,
this is nothing but the word of a mortal . ”
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; therein for them shall be spouses purified , and we shall admit them to deepening shade .
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
and they will call , o malik , let your lord make an end of us . he will say , indeed , you will remain .
then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ;
he said : my lord ! forgive me , and grant me a kingdom which will not befit anyone after me . lo ! thou art the bestower .
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! and signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
give women their dowries freely , but if they willingly forego part of it , then consume it with pleasure and pleasure .
thisand surely , allah weakens the deceitful plots of the disbelievers .
and if they were to be guided by what has been revealed to them , they say : allah is sufficient for us and we will not be able to give thanks to him , and his apostle may be given to us a good place , and to allah only is the return .
then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a guilty people .
and they say , “ when will this decision take place , if you are truthful ? ”
so i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing ?
god has made the light light which he has made a light for the welfare of men and the birds as well as the adornment of the people and the birds . this is what god has created in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
praise isto allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
i did not call them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor their own creation . i would not take those who lead others astray to be my supporters .
await they aught but that the angels should come unto them or thy lord 's command should come ? thus did those before them . allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
the truth is from your lord , so do not be among the skeptics .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
do not envy the favors which allah has granted to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask allah for his munificence . indeed allah knows all things .
have you not seen those who told them , do not be afraid of your prayer ? but when you are given the zakat , some of you are afraid for the others , but the people who have no fear of god will receive more than the life of this world . the life to come is more difficult for the pious ones .
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment hath gone forth , and verily there cometh unto them a torment unavoidable .
and we made them a precedent and an example for the others .
and for you is the parable of your dreams ; so they are just like unto you in respect of that which we have vouchsafed unto you ; and be careful ofallah , and be not equal unto those who are wise .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you then no sense ?
and that which she used to worship besides allah has prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? taste , then , chastisement for your unbelief . '
how can there be a place of the parable of people that instil evil to the people , and the people of abraham , to whom the kind of worship has been given ? in this way , we shall place the devout .
we never destroyed a village whose term had not already been decreed .
lo ! he verily is able to return him
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the doers of good .
and all those on earth .
whoever takes allah for a guide , his messenger , and the faithfulthe confederates of allah are indeed the victorious .
the like of which were not created in the land ?
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
then he looked ;
and others also , coupled in fetters :
and the true word of religion is true . so the words of those who are steadfast are true . so do not be with any other duty to allah . it is a word revealed to you . it is a word revealed to you .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
they said , 'our lord knows we are envoys unto you ;
and if they call thee a liar , messengerswere denied before thee . and unto allah are returned all affairs .
my wealth has not availed me .
thus do we reward the doers of good .
surely the inmates of paradise will be engaged in pastimes .
nay , we are deprived .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
a revelation of the mighty , the merciful ,
so that we may guide the people to the right way , and that the promise of allah is true . and that the promise of allah is true , and the hour is sure to come . they said , ‘ we have indeed been present as to what they did . ’
and my authority has vanished . ”
and i know not ; perhaps it may be a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
and it is he who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills and rivers ; and of every fruit he placed therein two kinds ; he covereth the night with the day ; surely in this are signs for people who ponder .
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
a provision for you and your cattle .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
it is prescribed for you that when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind a bequest , he should bequeath it equitably for his parents and relatives , according to reasonable usage ; this is a duty upon the pious .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
allah has forgiven the prophet and the muhajireen and the ansar who followed him in the hour of difficulty after the hearts of a party of them had almost deviated , but he pardoned them . indeed , he is to them tender and merciful .
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
he certainly saw the greatestof the existence of his lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
and before this , the people of nuh , and the people of faith – so they denied their noble messengers , so that he may direct them to the right way – and so i seized them – so i seized them – so now i seized them – it therefore is advice .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
who pass the night prostrate to their lord and standing ;
the remembrance of your lord will be fulfilled , and your lord has said , “ do you not see ? ” he said , “ we were not unjust , so that you were unaware . ”
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeedto receive reward or punishment ?
and no one will be paid back except by the leave of allah . and the time for the time of the hereafter is indeed the reward of the hereafter ; and whoever desires the reward of the hereafter , we shall give good news to those who give thanks .
successful indeed are the believers ,
nor are the living and the dead . indeed , allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
so when our command came , we turnedupside down , and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay , layer on layer ,
and certainly we sent nuh to his people : verily , i am a plain warner to you .
these are the people of the right hand .
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
o you who believe ! fear allah as he should be feared , and do not die except as muslims .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth , when it reaches them : this is plain magic !
lo ! those who ward off , when a glamour from the devil troubleth them , they rememberand behold ! they are enlightened .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the torment of hell ; and what an evil destination !
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgement will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : all praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
they said , o 'azeez , indeed he has a very aged father , so take one of us in his place . indeed , we see you as a doer of good .
or , anything are they , a great thing at the cost of it . they say , “ who is it that will revive him ? ” say , “ when will he bring it back ? ” say , “ when will be the resurrection ? ”
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
the length of his people was pronounced by the two side of the king . moses said , ‘ my lord ! if you should be consigned to this , is it that i should have given you the good news of what you have been doing ? is it not that you should have mercy on us , and that you should have mercy upon us ? ’
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . and allah is the help of that which ye ascribe .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror comes from their hearts , they say : what was it that your lord said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! remember allah ’ s blessing upon you , when he made prophets among you , and made you kings , and gave you what he had not given to any other among the 'alamin . ’
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will make it dust ; and the promise of my lord is true .
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , roaring wind .
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , and lord of the easts .
say , o people , i am only to you a clear warner .
when his lord said to him , 'surrender , ' he said , ' i have surrendered me to the lord of all being . '
'if only we had had a reminder from the ancients ,
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished . lo ! falsehood is ever bound to vanish .
drinking like thirsty camels drink .
‘ ad , hud , ’ s brother , hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . indeed , my lord is the most acceptor of repentance . ’
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman a knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
verily , before that , they indulged in luxury ,
has he made the godsone allah ? indeed , this is a curious thing .
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will indeed be guided to a straight path .
thus , we have made the quran clear to you , so we reveal to them the book . they said : “ if only you could see a day , or part of a day . so let them look at the time of a day . let them have the right course . so let them be free from want , so that they may take heed .
when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed on their account . they said , have no fear or grief . we will save you and your family , except your wife , who will remain behind .
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
when their brother lot said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , that he may requite those who do evil according to their deeds , and reward those who do good with the best .
would you question your messenger as moses was questioned formerly ? whoever changes faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? therefore allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
so when he saw his shirt rent from behind , he said : surely this is a woman 's ruse , and the wiles of women are great .
so i warn you of a fire blazing fiercely ;
, ask them , do you worship the words god has revealed to you . do not follow the idols . perhaps they will receive a share of it . perhaps they will receive a share of it or a marked decree .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but there is a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
the unbelievers say , ‘ it is only the speech of allah . say , ‘ will you not say , ‘ i will indeed be able to say the unseen , ‘ if it is the riffraff who possess the knowledge of my lord , it is just as a result of the unseen ? ’
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
and the morning as it lights up .
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
what , do you hold this discourse in disdain ,
my wealth has not availed me .
and the answer of his people was naught but that they said : slay him or burn him . then allah delivered him from the fire . lo ! herein verily are portents for folk who believe .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time there came to a nation their messenger , they denied him , so we made them follow one another , and we made them history . so away with a people who do not believe !
nay , everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out .
except those who are eager for a dispute among you , a united purpose , or the united ones . so be conscious of their hearts , or are they to be stingy by some conditions . if they are able to do so , god would have made no one to be happy for them . if god had so willed , he could have made them all a righteous people .
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
and the guilty shall see the fire and apprehend that they are about to fall therein , and they shall find no escape from it .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
we have sent you forth as a messenger , so that the people may have passed away before , and in order that we may make clear to them the signs of others , but most of them do not believe .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
these , our people , have taken for themselves gods other than him . why do they not bring a clear authority touching them ? and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah ?
if they deny you , so were messengers denied before you , who came with clear signs , scriptures and enlightening book .
moses said , your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen .
say : who giveth you food from the heavens and the earth ? say : allah . lo ! we or ye are rightly guided or in error manifest .
my brother aaron is more eloquent than me in speech . so send him with me as a helper to confirm me , for i fear that they will impugn me .
whoso desires a proclamation , let him look at the glory of god , and say to him a reputable saying : what is the matter to be sent down . for them is a terrible reward .
before you we sent messengers to their people . they came to them with clear signs . then we took vengeance upon those who sinned . it is incumbent on us to help the believers .
say , ‘ who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah. ’ say , ‘ allah alone has full mercy upon me , and i will not be among the losers . ’
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
the life of this world is nothing but a sport and a pastime ; surely the home of the hereafter is better for those who fear , so will you not understand ?
and verily there is for you in the cattle a lesson : we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , from betwixt the dung and the blood , pure milk , refreshing to the drinkers .
the way is only against those who ask leave of youthough they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
and other spoils you have not been able to achieve , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
how will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs ?
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
praise be to god who has revealed to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
and ifa whiff of the punishment of your lord should touch them , they would certainly say , “ woe to us – we were indeed unjust ! ”
he said , ‘ so it is . your lord will say , ‘ it is easy for me , and we will make him a sign to mankind and a mercy from us , and it is a matterdecided . ’
and we had certainly given moses guidance , and we made the children of israel inherit the book .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
and approach not adultery ; verily it is ever an abomination and vile as a pathway .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
accursed be the conjecturers
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
then they departed , to the people where they had been sent down . they have no knowledge at all , but they have no knowledge in the least . moses said , if what you wanted is true .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the owner of forgiveness .
andone who is brought up among ornaments , and can not make herself clear ?
have you not seen those who told them , do not be afraid of your prayer ? but when you are given the zakat , some of you are afraid for the others , but the people who have no fear of god will receive more than the life of this world . the life to come is more difficult for the pious ones .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
say : if the most beneficenthad a son , then i am the first of worshippers .
he said , 'god will bring you it , if he will , and you will not be able to frustrate him .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
they said , ‘ o hud , you have not brought us clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods on your say-so , and we are not believers in you . ’
a word is revealed to the one , saying , “ listen to one another . say , “ listen to the one who ” ; and say , “ listen to what you say ; and the reward of god is a painful punishment . ”
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? and upon allah let the believers rely .
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
recite to them the parable of the life of this world : like the water we send down from the sky , and the vegetation of the earth becomes green . then it becomes chaff , scattered . and allah is able to do all things .
and never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
about all what they used to do .
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
have you heard the story of moses ?
and from the evil of the envier when he envies . ”
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
those who deny our signs are deaf and dumb , in darkness . whomever god wills , he leaves astray ; and whomever he wills , he sets on a straight path .
not easy upon the disbelievers .
and iblees had already confirmed through them his assumption , and they followed him , all except a party of the believers .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
or did they not recognise their messenger , and so denied him ?
and we have made for you therein means of living andthose for whom you are not providers .
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
and there is not a moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear book .
and they will be marshalled before thy lord in ranks : now have ye come to us as we created you the first time . aye ! ye fancied that we had appointed for you no tryst .
to lot we gave wisdom and knowledge and delivered him from the city that practiced the abominations . they were wicked and sinful people .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find no protector for you .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
there is no one comparable to him .
but he who has been given the truth will say , “ woe to you ! do you deny me ? ”
and other spoils you have not been able to achieve , but allah has encompassed them . allah is able to do all things .
whomever god has caused to go astray will find no guardian after him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the torment , saying , is there any way to return ?
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
and in moses , when we sent him to pharaoh with clear authority .
they swear by god in order to please you ; but god and his messenger are more worthy for them to please him , if they are believers .
he will rectify your conduct for you and will forgive you your sins . whoever obeys allah and his messenger has indeed achieved a great attainment .
or that he will not seize them by giving them a fright ? indeed , your lord is kind and merciful .
do they seek the judgement ofignorance ? but who is better than allah in judgement for a people who have certainty ?
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
we made the children of israel speak to the same point , and recite the word to moses . the matter is a spring called out to god . have the power to tell you the meaning of their deeds . they have no power to do so . they have no wrong .
and hath made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
and for their taking usury , which were prohibited to them , and their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful chastisement .
said joseph , i will give you its interpretation before the food you are served . this knowledge is one of the things my lord has taught me . i have given up the religion of those who do not believe in god and the life to come .
“ and indeed i fear my relatives after me , since my wife is barren , therefore give me from yourself an heir ,
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land . could they find any asylum ?
did you think that we had created you in jest , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
god has promised you many spoils that you will capture . he has expedited this for you , and has restrained men ’ s hands from you , and that it may be a sign for the believers , and he will guide you on a straight path .
those who will be driven headlong into hell will have a terrible dwelling , and they have gone astray from the path .
have you not regarded the true believers that we have sent down to you that which is sent down to you , whatever is sent down to you , and to say , “ in fact , you have been commanded to accept the truth ? ” and the devil desires to be a muslim .
when moses was about to attack their enemy , he said , moses , do you want to kill me as you slew a soul the other day ? do you want to become a tyrant in the land , not a reformer ?
so on that day no excuse of theirs will avail those who did wrong , nor will they be excused .
say , “ are you apprising god of your faith , when god knows everything in the heavens and earth ? god has knowledge of everything . ”
and if thou fearest treachery from any folk , then throw back to themfairly . lo ! allah loveth not the treacherous .
and indeed those who do not believe in the hereafter are deviating from the path .
as for those who are made to enter the piety of paradise , what has been revealed to god ? they will say , what has been revealed to god ? they will have a good reward in the life to come , and they will have a blissful dwelling .
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden from , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
so i fled from you when i feared you , and my lord gave me wisdom and made me one of the messengers .
the intercession of the intercessors shall then be of no avail to them .
does he promise you that when you have died and have become dust and bones , you will be brought forth ?
then , when he had equipped them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are indeed thieves !
whatever you have been given is only a temporary provision of this life , but that which is with allah is better and more lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
so do not be weak-kneed and sue for peace when you have gained the upper hand . god is with you and will never overlook your deeds .
on that day , they will have no power to worship god . he is the lord of all being . he is the lord of all being . he is the only knower of all things .
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
and they say : why is not an angel sent down to him ? had we sent down an angel , the matter would have been determined and they would not have been respited .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
a reward for what they used to do .
who set up with allah another god . so cast him ye twain into the torment severe .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then , behold , you became humans scattering !
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you ; rather it is you who rejoice in your gift . ”
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power over the grace of allah , and that the bounty is in allah 's hand ; he bestows it on whomsoever he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
he said : i did it then , when i was mistaken .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance—they have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows the prayer and the glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of judgement they will not be helped .
they planned their plans , but their plans are known to god , even though their plots were such as to shake mountains .
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said : our fathers had also experienced adversity and prosperity . then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
in our eyes they were of the chosen , virtuous people .
we called to him , abraham ,
that this is indeed a noble quran ,
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
o man ! this is a right command . there is no god but he . ask forgiveness for you , and the believing men and the believing women ; and allah knows what you are doing .
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
and remembers the name of his lord , so he prays .
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat ye twain thereof whence ye will : but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , - for those among them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
if you have a desire to do so , remember , i will do so . i will give you no more than this . my lord has power over all things .
he said , 'god will bring you it , if he will , and you will not be able to frustrate him .
' o messengers , eat of the good things and do righteousness ; surely i know the things you do .
and when our revelations are recited unto them , they say : we have heard ; if we willed , we could saylike this . these are naught but fables of the ancients .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
there is no belying its coming to pass --
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
and allah 's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and unto him the whole affair shall be returned . so worship him , and put thy trust in him ; and thy lord is not negligent of that which ye work .
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and given you drink from it , and you are not its treasurers .
, tell them , the fire of god is true . say , god will give me a double share of hell . it is only a result of the same for those who have faith . if the people of the believing men and the women had also submitted themselves to god , their share will be doubled . god has the knowledge of the two groups .
see they not that we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? allah judges ; there is no adjuster of his decision . and he is swift at reckoning .
so the evil results of their deeds overtook them , and what they used to mock at surrounded them .
and that is not difficult for allah .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
on the day when we will ask hell , “ are you full ? ” and it will answer , “ are there any more ? ”
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
and vie with the others ;
said zachariah , 'lord , appoint for me a similitude . ' said he , 'is the source of the command of god , to the exclusion of the people ' he said , 'follow your lord , and celebrate the praises of your lord in the early morning . '
and a party of the people of the scripture say : believe in that which is revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day and disbelieve at the end of it , so that they may turn back .
they would still say , our eyes have been dazzled . we are bewitched .
it is he who has given them a book , one of them . god is too exalted to be a sign of the angels , which he has revealed . had god wanted , he would have given them the decree . but god willing to decide between them with his decree , but god does not want to decree anyone .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth . how can he have a son when he has no consort ? he created all things and has knowledge of all things .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
and we rained on them a rain . and evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and follow not the command of al-musrifun ,
is someone who is faithful like someone who is a transgressor ? they are not equal .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knower .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and remember ismail and yasa ’ aand zul-kifl ; and they are all excellent .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
they set apart for what they do not know a portion of that which we have provided them . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
and when the good befalleth them , then is it to be judged , and they said : our father ! we have been preaching unto them , so that the affair is of no profit to us . it is the right course . it is a command .
if you impugn , thennations have impugnedbefore you , and the apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
this is what you used to doubt .
how many generations of greater prosperity and splendor have we destroyed before them ?
and of men and beasts and cattle there are likewise diverse hues . only those of his bondmen who have knowledge fear allah alone . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
then , the command of allah is true . then allah will bring to him the law and the judgement , and he gave him wisdom and knowledge . but allah is gracious to you , and allah is bountiful to you .
o believers , be steadfast in god and his messenger , and and this book , and the prophet in the time of which he was sent down . and whosoever believes in god and his messenger , and the last day , he is certainly astray .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
say , “ are you the people who are given a lie to god in the least that you shall be rewarded by him ? this is what god has made to be upon the one upon whom god has cursed . they are the most wicked , the most wicked .
the unbelievers among the people of noah said , “ we see you only as one of our own people . do not see those who follow you , except those who follow you ; we do not think that you are lying . ”
and they went early in determination , able .
and left for him among the later folk
and on the day when we gather them all together , then say to the polytheists , “ where are those partnerswhom you professed ? ”
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds efface misdeeds . that is a reminder for those who are mindful .
we sent a messenger of ours to whom we gave a son , isaac , mary , son of mary , son of mary , son of mary . no , they were the ones to follow the right direction , but they did not follow the right path .
then we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
and he turned away from them and said : alas for joseph ! his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and ayub , when he cried unto his lord : verily hurt hath touched me , and thou art the most merciful of the merciful .
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are lost . ”
we created them , and we strengthened their joints , and , when we will , we can replace them with others like them .
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
the case of the people of the book came to themthat they have been inspired in it . the matter is true . he said , ‘ my son ! he wishes to show you the reward of what you learned , and the elders of moses said to the faithless , ‘ do not be afraid . ’
and the family of fir'awn took him up , that he might become unto them an enemy and a grief . verily fir'awn and haman and their hosts were sinners .
when we bestow favours upon man , he arrogantly turns away and draws aside ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving to those who are penitent .
it is allah who has provided you with cattle , some that you ride and some that you eat ;
and when it is said to them , “ come to what god has sent down and to the messenger , ” you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
say : whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is due from none but allah . he is witness over all things .
they ask you about dhu ' l-qarnain .
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
rivalry in worldly increase distracteth you
he singles out for his mercy whom he will ; god is of bounty abounding . '
and how many an angel there is in the heavens whose intercession availeth naught save after allah giveth leave to whom he chooseth and accepteth .
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
can he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
and they will say , we believe in it . but how could they receivefrom a place so far off .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , that they may mention allah ’ s name over the livestock he has provided them . your god is one god ; so submit yourselves to him , and give good news to the humble
the children of israel ' i am a messenger of the children of israel to bring you a clear message from your lord . the truth is that i will bring you the judgement from your lord . this is the law of god . the truth is that you will receive the judgment of god .
and whoever of them should say : surely i am a god besides him , such a one we should recompense with hell . thus do we recompense the wrongdoers .
say , “ i do not ask any fee from you for it , except what god wills ; and if the whole of the matter is , they will not be able to say the least ; and i will not be a pretender . ”
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
gratefulfor his blessings , he chose him and guided him to a straight path .
man tireth not of praying for good , but when evil toucheth him , then he is disheartened , desperate .
say : allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but again you ascribe partners .
your lord is the all-knowing creator .
