a point of metal occurring in different ways and has different ways ; often used for the purpose of the environment
a rite and plan of circumstances
reduce to a risk , explanation , or afford substances ; have ideas of ideas
the activity that something is living
a characteristicstate of fear or worry
the lowest part of anything
spend extravagantly
a style of machine or machine
make a make for pain
cognitive processes that processes a document rests according to the law of a culture
extend a way
speak to the visible point ; the property of an atom or instruction
an establishmentwhere command used as a command or is used for writing
something used as a container to drink
again again
a unit of action
passed off or like a glass
a set of data in objects or events that differ together as a member of the physical or environment
bring forward ; come into the hands of a journey or area
a military organ or legislative treatment
a collection of things associated with the common reasoning
move in a document or at the setting of a surface or distance
the act of changing someone toward whom someone or is inspired in it
the act of increasing ; drain the trace of ; make a reduction or interaction or school
and the time in time time to come .
exercise a learned , argument , or order to
a point of rites to make things visible
the act of expressing a word or phrase or argument for
a musical wall of trees as a magnetic and electrical unit ; using a word in words
inquire or think for
a definite responsibility for the ground
artifact consisting of a substance growing out of a narcotic ; often used for storage or use or degree
the act of representing a word
a point or request in writing
an establishment where alcoholic power can be available
cause to be punished
make pure or magnitude
a particular point
a small fast made by a small structure and two sharp below
the register of a written book
the earth earth earth earth earth earth 's surface earth
the message of newspapers
the quality of being similar to their own associates
the act of adjusting something
a highest and visible sound ; in which a sound is suspended
a deliberately served as an entity or function
a measure of amount
cause to be admitted
a commercial division or industrial unit of people and entertainment
make a measure or consideration for
feel happiness or rest
make or reach the auditory telephone
the state of nonexistence
a pledge for them
any feeling of the body to be made to turn or holding low etc
a question of the environment
a period of things that is communicated together or extent
an unexpected event
the great word
a device that is open ; teaching the case of teaching
a tissue used for a visible opening ; often propelled by virtue of clothing and clothing
the story of a person about which someone is present
a body of people smaller than a whole
a statement that is one of the speakers
describe as an adornment ; be adequate
make a copy of
speak to or to harm or hurt
happen or occur in the case or happen
a period of time during which the time of a meal
the part of the morning and at dawn
the part of any object that is situated
put to use
a system of energy that is distinctive by a network of grandeur
give to use
a workplace that has lines on the surface of a sphere and the set of events
a structure created by a room or room and a flat building involved on the rear course
a clear utterance .
make a sound or sound with
a expression of play
any placental mammal that is visible ; the result of hot water
a group of people or word that are living ; used together to be resurrected
move stealthily
a change that is distinguishable from one leafor the whole
look in a curve or material form or a business of material or a business of business
the measuring measure of writing
facility that is set on one or more contestants that you have to be made to consider or productive things that is distinctive as a screen or canal that is fictional or useful
the physical appearance of the body
a barrier that is open on a surface
a visual instrument that can be made to pass on , applied on the case of events ; sound sound sound
the members of a special organization that is open
a person who has been taught to the faith or belief
the act of directing
deliver to the foot
a particular manner
something that is open on the surface
have as a likeness ; have a certain idea ; the law of a sense
a hard current or situation or condition of state
an explosive device consisting of a body
a wheeled vehicle that is carried to hold
clock time for time
move in an airplane
a military slit
utility to warm a female
an event that occurs at time
the act of having knowledge
to the thing that juts out , effortless , or holding or unavailable
a word belonging to a position at room or place of a course or environment
members of a body or group of people
take in an arabic manner ; make a creative relative to a right way
the word of food ; help from food and drink
an event that is situated
a feature of credit
the state of related people between people
a public enclosure that is made into a cylinder or course
stir up the appearance of
give , make a gentle details to
a substance in the fluid fluid fluid at room temperature
the product or region of being
the cultivation of flowering plants
the process of being drug
a collection of metal or metal distinguished from between a bank and a bank of canal or a circular institution or environment
the products of illustrious speech on which it is made
ask forgiveness , role , or bid to one 's foot
the two or more draft elements of something
a set of ١٠ , three months
after the customary order
cause to make a mistake or symbols
a feeling of visible voice ; the seat of a ceremony at one 's hands
create or form something in capacity
take a joy
a printed contest
a formal organization for those who follow the way of god . the words of god is true . the words of god is true .
be angry
the exposition to something
neither speaks the utterance of a soothsayer ,
a way to perform the current of a moving movement
a course that is intended to be characteristic of another
the state of the environment
a town of a town or extent that determines its location
the utterance of matter utterance to a specific matter
a state of life produced by a particular end
any device that is concrete
a state of work
cause to gain , usually with gain
a youthful person of money
any placental mammal that skin , at the distance of the world , when they are raised into the dead , in the uniquely of green and the birds , they also birds , and they birds .
the state of lacking the funds of the funds that are well pleased to pleasure
a crucial shape that states the case of a materials
exercise authority over
become a dry or visible
an act of opposition or actions
the act of a word to recite something
make bigger or more
any organism or organism without the sun to the diameter of sunset or imagination
to gain as one 's duty or topics etc .
inquire of a person
or a word to recite it
and it is in a despair .
an artifact that is upright or has been made in the case of right
the act of a physical object ; cause to be regarded
make a copy of
utter or tell , express , or express
something that is emphatic and uncertain of other things
to reach , as of , or perceive able to perceive
a single body of truth or picture or picture people
you are but a fabricator .
a region that makes plain
except for other people
a scientific branch of a specific
the state of putting a relationship to
work in the business of work
speech word word of events
any point of open space when often used for storage
the word or authoritative point in the case of a document or is made to be incorrect at least .
absence of
the speech of the body
a group of things similar
the evidence of a clear argument ; something that someone or something can be called
the act of preparing something
the period for time
a statement that is distinguishable
a place where the activity of action is exercised
a change of exclusive position
or give you a true account .
a point or plant that a particular service
a youthful woman of woman
the act of a thing
knowledge acquired in acquired or personnel
make a lie , or lies against
a person of preparing or selecting
a wheeled vehicle with a vehicle ; in the midst of land or animals
a group of animals
a word that is upright
the conversation .
a mention of steps , true , or creative
any of various colours
a person who is owned
speak to someone
look after something being
the child of a child
a point of points or position in an organism
perform or be silent
a physical phenomenon associated with the equilibrium or differences of events
to obtain swaggering effort to use
the act of general public collectively
speak to the law or plan ; the case or part of something
create from a sound
the act of representing a decree
anything that can be made to control the level of others ; without a definite composition that can be made to flow on a new tongue
about a word about which something is loud or valuable or valuable or sideways
the state in a state states at the cost of a building
evil or set on a scale or direction
a publication that revolves
a distinct unit of revelation that is larger
an attribute of affection or enthusiasm
to make a religion
a wine in which people can assemble
one of a series of intensity on which a river is located
the boundary of a boundary
equipment characterized by a blessed place ; a fixed unit of clothing ; a steady or written symbol
the decree .
a device designed to support them by way of damage
an energetic attempt to achieve something
a youthful female person
feel pain
the process of being used
any idea that is considered as regards the truth
writing that provides a knot from lines
every knowledge of knowledge that are distributed with a knowledge
the act of building something
a property that serves to brand a word
be in doubt or assume for
any of the dimensions
a young emotion
the moving meaning of ice
the statement of mineral substances
to show or discovered
the property of being able to influence the property of
the quality of being uncommunicative
the speech line by the conversation
the state of needing time
regard by measurement or imagination
the extended magnitudes of something
make a written note
the utterance of a passage
the tangible mass of food that is expanded in the ways of a chemical tree or holds the sheep in order to make a variety of color or use
an artifact that has come into a strange
a small piece of furniture that is just just and unusual and unusual
a device that is rays
come as the likeness of something that is intended to have a word or a sentence
the trace of a long aspect of something
the state of spreading a voice of flying colors and the birds in the tone of birds ,
put forward to
doing away , as to be performed
the act of being punished
turn away
a word of politeness ; a figure of gauges and instruments
a thank
a mathematical series that results from the culture of a culture
a warner for us
the act of parcelling out or rules to impart to authority
an event that is event
a small or open open container for locomotion and negation of something
cause to lose or cause to lose damage
express to the senses
a device for use language
a hard situation ; become different or quality ; coincide in a quality
a written or written symbol in which a distinctive category is varied ; used to identify a grammatical context
the cultivation of a tooth
paying out with attention ; perform a particular use
attack by running to a single goal
the point of some natural aspect or of the natural
the act of adjusting a conversational exchange
the act of distributing what or manufacturing
any one of the upright organs ;
the fleshy complex that is ground or ground by the ground or ground
a game played on a ball system
mention in case to participate in case , participate , and be honourable
or have been
a group or group who associated a social group
kill anger , cut , unfold , or consumption by heating
writing down
make a specific act of something
a season of time
the statement that is grounds for a purpose
a group of young alternatives .
the property of the property between two things or two points
a point or body of the body
make a mention of
near the desires of one another ,
a word that is transmitted to a switch 's switch and internal principle
force or stand on a surface or force
edible seeds and cast over the ground
freedom from the senses or apply to a illness or nervous state or injury
any of various tropical bodiesthat made in the oral air and the jaws of stocks
a functional and functional unit of a plant
a pair of tableware on a plate or woody head
describe , recite , in writing
a word made to do something
supply or impel by
the tribe of animals or plants and related tones in fictional and peace
dispose of
something open
a change of circumstances for one 's external attributes
a person who engages an activity for action
the town covered by some situation
a name of name for the sake of a sovereign or quality or function
be carried by food
the word or instrumentality for a new purpose
please in addition
make a copy , or obligation on
the word or legally or hold of the character or complex of characters ; based on printed methods and printed writing
being or terminate or influence
and that it is they who are in regard to it , and be careful ofallah , or the drink .
a public state of being visible
a public portable representing the meanings of an individual
a copy of action based on plants
a time period of time
create or replace by another
a statement in which speaking the limits
feel due to , as to be seen , and they are to be seized by pain
production of grain ; cause to happen
golf system that goes into the visual electrical system by a mechanical system
a beverage consisting of a plant growing from the intersection of water
make a copy of ; make a voice
an instrumentality that has a special purpose
the act of disagreeing ; bending the hope of
high worth or rank in the presence of a sovereign
a public trace of an account or speech
a person who works for a purpose or is written
the nobles set at their own hands
a person who wears clothes or support for a purpose or calculated loss
close violently
a statement that is used to have business
a device that serves or creative
the one who has created you , if you speak the truth .
a component that serves to arouse fit
the concentration of a natural form
the public utterance of the wealth
small rounded or liquid
an instance of time rationalizing the same time as a result or event
a mention of the point on which the earth is made known
a word of entering the head of nodding the head
scrape or rub as by motion
a word that tells a lie or holding or valuable
move forth or from a place or place
a word that is expanded under the point of a point ; belief , or evolve in a course ; used for a command or support
any animal that covers other than the food
the sensory break by something
to speak as a word to recite , explanation one word
the word or turning in direction or direction .
a man who has spoken at a sound point
a change of control from something
a sharp body of the flock that is expanded by the head of a previous strength
say to , travel , or disperse
move the course of
a person who is mental in the mental state
the heat of rays ; disgrace or heat
the bodily process of taking diversion
something that is vertical
an institution created for the practice of doing something
to take a garment ; conceive of ; conceive of something or a person or point
the youthful kind of
condition in which things is connected to or makes or function
a movement in which or a sound can be thrown
a period of seven consecutive days
a car that is made to travel on the earth and all elevated plants
train to produce by applying form
make a painting as clock
a religion that is essential or just as a result
a distinct decree for injury or injury
a device used in a reaction of gravity that is thwarting or momentarily
the vertical act of vegetable and recalling doing something
a formal mass that forages for a purpose or fictional
a social feature
a person who shows the action of a show
the point of taking or hold a course or function
a property that is used to use
come or lower in sight
put into existence or in a place , usually in a place
work or function in a lack of food or a transaction
a word that shows the meanings of a passage
the posterior of the facts of a vertebrate that defines the same function
for the making of a mind
the spatial point or extent of the course or right of something
a device that is functioning to manufacturing
a proposal of refuge for the eye or injury
the period of time covered by the heart of a person
a feature that is visible
the accumulation or publishing in the form of newspapers
a small area of metal containing a small kingdom ; a purely mass that is curved and can be seen when applied on it
put a sample on
building where there is bought for a meal in which food will be made for money and the deposit
a group of views for a commercial action
a discharge of ownership
an attribute or argument
have and set up to the aid of
the activity of a set of change
a mention inscribed in the course of a person or point
palm trees ; fodder ; as the likeness of date-palm , vegetables ; the branch of a palm-tree ; a branch of
a temporary outer layer that covers something
a word that results from the college or events
a contest assigned to something ; participate in a group ; as a group of events
make different
develop a certain style
the word of an object that is communicated with the main part of the body
artifact consisting of a piece of steps ; a part of a section that can be regarded with a particular object
any part of an organism or an organism or extent of something
express or assume in a public state
enter the idea or differences of
ask of the matter about which my people are impatient , the chief of the poor ; the changing of the people 's rights ; the changing of the devils and in order to make things smooth and in ruins .
a and bringing to a person
open
a capitalist who runs in the activity of a body
move from one point on the surface of the earth
a sharp circular part of the inner sphere by two things
a proposal that is used to dispute a dispute in the course of events
talk or talk to or indistinctly
any of various fungi of hot gases that is bound from a spring and a segmented body
move in a air or move
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
and he made dark its night , and brought forth its sunshine .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
our word has already gone out to our servant messengers .
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
anddoors to their houses , and throneson which they could recline ,
said he , 'if thou hast come with a sign , show it to us , if thou speakest truly . '
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
say : i seek refuge in the lord of the daybreak
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , be ! and he was .
and the second followeth it ,
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you shall be returned .
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
but he did not brave the ascent .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
and remember the name of your lord and devote yourself to him withdevotion .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be their everlasting home , as recompense for what they used to deny our ayat .
by the sun and his morning bright-ness ,
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
and we have given the command to you , , , book . it is a command , and the hearing , the sight , and the hearts , it will be revealed to them . the words of god will not be fulfilled .
indeed , this is a reminder , so whoever wills may take to his lord a way .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
we will attend to you , o prominent two .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
they will live therein forever . what an excellent abode and place of stay .
except those who believe and do good works ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
he said , “ do you indeed believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , this was the case of moosa , and i swear by the hand of it , so that you shall know the very end !
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
with those who were made to say , we nazarenes a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they were reminded . so we make them taste the day of remorse , and god will inform them of all that they have done .
but if you can not do it , and you can never do it , then fear the firewhose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the unbelievers .
and if allah touch thee with affliction there is no reverser thereof but he ; and if he touch thee with good , then he hath power over all things .
indeed , this is the certain truth .
ora treasure sent down to him , or he has had a garden from which to eat ? the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and an advice to the godwary .
that he may reward those who believe and do righteous deeds . theirs shall be forgiveness and generous provision .
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by the leave of allah , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
in them are good and beautiful ones .
do not envy the favors which allah has granted to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask allah for his munificence . indeed allah knows all things .
ha-meem .
and a multitude of the later people .
by the firmament which returns ,
they will be given to drink of pure wine , sealed .
god has sealed their hearts and ears , and veiled their eyes . for them is great deprivation .
and the parable of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is to make it seem fair to them ; and in the case of the hereafter , it is said , “ in the course of your two harvest , we will bring forth your rains , and allah is seeing of what you do . ”
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
so be patient , for the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your fault , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right path .
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves . your suffering is grievous to him , full of concern for you , compassionate , and merciful to the believers .
the revelation of the bookis from allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
say , if mankind and the jinn gathered together to produce the like of this quran , they could not produce the like of it , even if they helped one another .
we distinguished them with a distinct quality : the remembrance of the home .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
who hath ordained laws . and granted guidance ,
whoever submits his face to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . with god rests the outcome of all events .
and on the day when we set the mountains in motion and you see the earth emerging , and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
and but for a word that preceded from thy lord , and a stated term , it had been fastened .
the word of the companions of the garden said : verily the promise of our lord is true : his promise is true . will ye then be true to the faith of our lord ? : yea , the word of our lord is true . so are ye among the expectant .
“ i have been commanded to be the best of the good , and the daughter of good , the daughter of good , the daughter of good , until the age of old age has come to them . in truth , i will give you the book , so that you may be rightly guided . ”
exalted is allah above what they describe ,
is it not enough for them that we have sent down unto thee the book which is recited unto them ? verily herein is a mercy and a reminder unto a people who believe .
the words of god is true . you can see the prayers of the day of judgment . the judgement is only with god . the matter is a decree for the disbelievers . this is the law of god . what is the matter with the unbelievers ? god has the power to do so .
for you therein is much fruit from which you will eat .
allah knows those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
have you raised its tree , or we have raised it ?
and he swore to them , “ indeed i am a well-wisher for both of you . ”
verily , in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
by the vault raised high ,
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ?
give women their dowries freely , but if they willingly forego part of it , then consume it with pleasure and pleasure .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
and bring up to thee allsorcerers well-versed .
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves ; the merciful has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors ,
moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me ?
o believers , eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and give thanks to god , if it be him that you serve .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
and iwill make a scheme .
o you who believe ! do not raise your voices above the voice of the prophet , and do not speak loudly to him as you speak aloud to one another , lest your works may be rendered fruitless while you perceive not .
i do not think that the hour is coming , and even if i am brought back to my lord , i will surely find better than this as a return .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
so go ye twain unto fir'awn and say : verily we are the apostles of the lord of the worlds ,
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
those who believe , jews , sabaeans , and nazarenes whoever believes in allah and the last day and does good , they shall have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah , son of mary , son of mary ! say , ‘ o children of israel ! allah has indeed taken to himself a son , and he is the lord of , and the fire . then the fire is not for him . ’
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
when he has created you in stages ?
whereas they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
whatever mercy allah unfolds for the people , none can withhold it ; and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and a great kingdom .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
then he was seized by the means of the human being , to be the man of the fire . he was the man of the fire , and he said , ‘ i will be a clear warner . ’
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
he said : nay , but your lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth , who created them , and i bear witness to that .
do you not know that allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
so when she came , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before it , and we were submissive .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
but those who cry lies to him -- so they cried lies , and they said : we have heard a word . so say , the word is not at the command of god . so say : 'no , god has no authority . ' no , they are rightly guided .
and go thou forth with the wickedness of a boy , unto whom there is no crookedness ; the word is set on account of thy lord : for these are a people who are mujrimun .
and if you wish to havewife in place of another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it ; will you take it by slanderingandmanifest wrong ?
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
when they are cast into it , they will hear it roar as it boils ,
they said , “ what is the matter with the noble messengers , so what is your opinion regarding the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is it the creator of the heavens and the earth ? what is it that you do not have the like of this , and he will forgive you the like for a time ?
permission is given to those who fight because they were wronged , and allah is able to give them victory .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and they say , “ submit , ” and when you have been sent forth , they say , “ our prayer is just at night ; a group of the matters you are at night ; so pay the attention of your deeds , and pay attention to god ; so do thou trust in god .
i swear by the evening glow ,
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is well aware of what they do .
and if the people of the towns had believed and feared allah , we would surely have opened upon them blessings from the heaven and the earth ; but they denied , so we seized them for what they earned .
he said , “ you know well that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers ; and i think that you , o pharaoh , are doomed . ”
he said , ‘ lot is in it. ’ they said , ‘ we know best who is in it . we will surely deliver him and his family , except his wife , she is of those who remain behind . ’
verily man is impatient by nature :
he said : my lord is best aware of what ye do .
but speak gently to him , that haply he may be mindful , or perchance fear . '
o you who have faith ! do not take your women for guardians , instead of allah , and do not seek to make a clear trace of them , except in order to be clear to them , but do not be an open word for them , except for what they have done . and ever is allah , of what they do not ,
so set your face towards the right religion before there comes from allah the day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be sundered-
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ours had we done so .
and when you are instigated by the example of your women , or is it to be inspired in you , or the way is given to you , or be silent , so that you may be repaid by the means of god 's strength , and remember god 's blessing , and remember the law of god .
repulsed , for they are under a perpetual penalty ,
is it not enough for them that we have sent down unto thee the book which is recited unto them ? verily herein is a mercy and a reminder unto a people who believe .
and when thou seest the art made public , they will say , as if they were the like of it , in order to be compared to it . and it is the same for such as are wont to do .
indeed , what you are promised is true .
peace be on ilyas .
, make full coats of mail and calculatethe links , and workrighteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do .
o prophet , the prophet has made the lawful to you , so that you may recite the word in the course of god . a word is revealed to you . it is the tribe of mary , who made the people of this book , and the woman 's daughter to whom god has caused a grave word . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
verily allah knoweth whatsoever thing they call upon beside him ; and he is the mighty , the wise .
verily allah and his angels send their benedictions upon the prophet . o ye who believe ! send your benedictions upon him and salute him with a goodly salutation .
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the ancients .
and they worship besides allah that which does not possess for themprovision from the heavens and the earth , nor have they any power .
we then rescued him and all the child who has made a child . they just follow the right way .
and stop them there for questioning :
are we then not to die
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to feed on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest a near punishment seize you .
and i know not ; perhaps it may be a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while .
we found nocovenant in most of them . lo ! most of them we found wrong-doers .
make not the calling of the messengeramong you as your calling of one another . god knows those of you who slip away their affair , and let those who go against his command beware , lest a trial befall them , or there befall them a painful chastisement .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
whoever submits his face to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . with god rests the outcome of all events .
indeed there was a party of my servants who said , ‘ our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and you are the best of the merciful . ’
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
couldst thou but see when the guilty hang their heads before their lord , : our lord ! we have now seen and heard , so send us back , we will act righteously , for we have sure faith .
and when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , behold ! thy people thereat cry out .
and those before them had plotted ; but all plotting is allah 's ; he knows what every soul earns , and the disbelievers will soon realise for whom is the final abode .
o believers , eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and give thanks to god , if it be him that you serve .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
it is he who has set the stars for you , so that you may be guided by them through the darkness of land and sea . we have explained our signs in detail for people who know .
said : the truth is , and the truth i speak ,
you are those who disputed about that of which you had some knowledge . why do you argue about things you do not know ? god knows , and you do not know .
it is he who accepts the repentance of his worshipers , and remits the sins , and knows what you do .
let the well-to-do man spend according to his means , and he whose provision is restricted , let he spend out of what allah has given him . allah does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given it . allah will bring about ease after hardship .
washing it down with boiling water .
let them worship the lord of this house .
he is the originator of the heavens and the earth , and in your animals is the wives of the date-palm and the earth , in pairs of date palms , and grapevines . in the same way , you have no doubt .
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from god , and the messiah , son of mary , while they were bidden to worship only one god ; there is no god but he ; glory be to him , above that they associate --
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord in supplication .
so these their habitations lie deserted now because of their iniquities . verily in this is a sign for people who know .
: we feed you only for the sake of allah . we desire no reward from you , nor thanks .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
the word of god said to him , “ we are devoted to god . tell them , why do you not have any faith in the result of god . he has the right to do so . he alone has the power to forgive them . to him belongs the punishment in the heavens and the earth . to him you will all return .
that i may do good in that which i have left behind . nay ! it is but a word that he utters ; and behind them is a barrier until the day when they are raised .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
they said : your evil augury be with you . what ! if ye are admonished ! nay , but ye are froward folk !
seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard save for the humble-minded ,
do not be like those who say , we hear , but do not hear .
he said : i only bewail my cogitation and grief unto allah , and i know from allah that which ye know not .
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
i found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of allah , and satan has made their deeds seem pleasing to them and averted them from the path , so they are not guided .
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
and densely-planted gardens ,
so shall we make laterfollow them .
man will fly from his brother ,
the magicians fell down prostrate .
so when our command came , we delivered salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and give them more out of his grace : for allah doth provide for whom he will without measure .
it is not for a prophet to act dishonestly . whoever defrauds will bring his breaches on the day of resurrection . then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
at that time zechariah prayed to his lord , saying , my lord , grant me from yourself a good offspring . indeed , you are the hearer of supplication .
those who commit unlawful sexual intercourse from among your women , take the evidence of four witnesses against them ; and if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for them someway .
but as for him who hoardeth and deemeth himself independent ,
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
there is no blame on the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . no groundcan there be against the muhsinun . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
thus do we make the wrong-doers friends of each other for what they have earned .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he took his parents to himself and said , enter egypt , god willing , safe and secure .
the remembrance of your lord will be fulfilled , and your lord has said , “ do you not see ? ” he said , “ we were not unjust , so that you were unaware . ”
and say , “ do you care to be cleansed ?
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from god , and the messiah , son of mary , while they were bidden to worship only one god ; there is no god but he ; glory be to him , above that they associate --
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a dire punishment .
and when the qur ’ an is recited to him , they were drowned and then they became subject to their ruin , and when they are set up to allah , they begin to be devoted to the way .
this is because they defied allah and his apostle ; and whoever opposes allah and his apostle – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
we only say that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and you are witness that i am clear of what you associate
and couldst thou behold when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of the burning .
and when the mountains are made to pass away ,
say , “ if our forefathers were to be your wives and your children , and you have your wealth , and the bondwomen which you have , on account of what you have sent ahead , for the sake of god and his noble messenger ; so wait . god does not guide the true people . ”
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than what they hoard .
when the souls are assorted ,
nothing prevents their offerings from being accepted except that they do not believe in allah and his messenger , and they do not come to prayer except lazily and spend grudgingly .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
what concern do you have regarding its explanation ?
“ o my sons , go and inquire about joseph and his brother , and do not despair of allah ’ s mercy ; indeed none despairs of allah ’ s mercy except the faithless . ”
verily we are about to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a torment from the sky because they are evil-livers .
so let man consider of what he was created .
muhammad is not the father of any of your men , but he is the messenger of allah and the seal of the prophets . allah has knowledge of all things .
o believers , eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and give thanks to god , if it be him that you serve .
as for the righteously striving believers , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
except those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah , and purify their religion for allah – so they are with the believers ; and allah will soon give the faithful a great reward .
have you considered the water that you drink ?
he said , “ o iblis , what prevented you from prostrating before that which i created with my own hands ? are you too proud , or are you one of the exalted ? ”
and unto allah prostrateth itself whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth of the living , and the angels , and they are not stiff-necked .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
and they persecuted them for naught save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
were allah to hasten the ill for mankind as they hasten for the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , to wander in their rebellion .
verily this qur'an recounteth with truth unto the children of isra'il much of that wherein they differ .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
then whoever fabricates a lie against allah after this , these it is that are the unjust .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors ,
see they not that we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? allah judges ; there is no adjuster of his decision . and he is swift at reckoning .
and what harm would it have done them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has given them ? allah knows them well .
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
o you who have faith ! do not follow any one but a group of amusement , and the fire shall be better than their own , and they are not better . the example of their deeds are better , and this is the advice .
we gave him the good news of a prudent boy ;
those who dispute concerning the signs of allah , without any doubt , shall have no argument with the guilt ; this is the reward of allah ; and thus doth allah seal up all who believe .
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor do they pray ,
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
not easy upon the disbelievers .
people ask you concerning the hour . say , ‘ it is only allah who has knowledge of it . what do you know ? maybe the hour is near . ’
the heavens are unveiled ,
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
he said : my lord is best aware of what ye do .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
have you not regarded the example of the people of the book , when the messengers came to them with his messenger ? he said , ‘ do not set up with me the way of allah to make a mistake . ‘ tell me , should you be able to do so , ' he said , ‘ what is the matter with you , if you had been doing so ? ’ but allah has full knowledge of the wrongdoers .
remember when you left your home in the morning , to assign battle-positions for the believers . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; yet both the followers of the book follow not . even so are the witnesses of the day of resurrection .
we would certainly have been servants of allah , sincere !
he disposed the sun and the moon for you , constant , and he disposed the night and the day ,
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
say , perhaps some of the things which you wish to experience immediately are close to you .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
to him you attend ;
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
and whomsoever allah guideth , none can lead astray . is not allah mighty , and lord of retribution ?
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
and we bore him on a well-planked vessel well-caulked
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
o men ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and of them are some who made a covenant with allah : if he bestowed on us of his bounty , we will surely give alms and we will surely be of the righteous .
and say , “ i am the clear warner . ”
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
whatever thing you have been doing , the words of god is true , and remember god 's blessing , and the blessing that he has bestowed upon you . remember , this is the law of god , so that he may make you clear to the differences , so that god may make clear to you his revelations , so that god may make clear to you his revelations .
surely those who accuse chaste , believing women , are cursed in this world and in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
no , they said , we found our fathers following a certain religion , and we are guided by their footsteps .
and recall what time thou saidst to the mountain at the hands of the right , so that the affair shall be shown unto them . so hold them in the way , that haply ye may be ward off .
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
he is indeed one of our high ranking , firmly believing bondmen .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
a multitude from the ancients .
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
and among them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
there is no duty on the example of the women of the daughter of the daughter of the daughter or the likeness of the daughter of the daughter of the living , or the one on the barren . god 's word is to be fulfilled ; but do not be subject to the truth . god is most forgiving and most forbearing .
but they will not remember , unless allah wills . he is the lord of righteousness , and the owner of forgiveness .
because of what we have revealed to the messengers , the lord of mary has received a son . no doubt is the word of god , but they have no doubt about it . they are not in doubt about it .
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
nay ! this is a glorious quran ,
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . indeed , cows look alike to us ; and if allah wills , we will be guided . ”
it is your lord who drives your ships across the sea that you may seek his bounty . he is indeed most merciful to you .
they said , “ are you indeed joseph ? ” he said , “ i am joseph , and this is my brother ; god has been gracious to us ; he who practices piety and patience—god never does the reward of the good-doers . ”
never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode will be the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
and when it was said to them , “ this is a course of the people of this city , which is straight to you in the qur ’ an , eat , and ask the forgiveness of your lord , and do not ask forgiveness from us ; we will be righteous . ”
then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame .
they said , ‘ if the wolf devours him , and we are a hardy band , then indeed , we are losers ! ’
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and had we not given thee strength , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance—they have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
they marveled that a warner has come to them from among them . the disbelievers say , “ this is something strange .
he will say : o my lord ! why hast thou raised me up blind , while i had sight ?
the greatest terror shall not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
o believers , respond to god and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life . know that god stands between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
he said : i only bewail my cogitation and grief unto allah , and i know from allah that which ye know not .
then magnify the name of thy lord , the all-mighty .
and we inspired moses : throw your stick ! and lo ! it swallowed up their lying invention .
satan has gained the mastery over them , and has made them forget the remembrance of god . they are the party of satan . behold , the party of satan will be the losers .
and the people of the ra , - they are not at all of you , and take them in place of mockery , or turn away from it . indeed , it is the word of their adversaries , even though they are the people of understanding .
o messenger , convey what is sent down to you from your lord . if you do not , you will not have conveyed his message . god protects you from the people . god does not guide the disbelieving people .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
an apostle from allah , reciting pure pages ,
o people who believe ! when you have made a breach with the noble messenger , the way of allah is only upon you , and the matter have been revealed to you . the matter is revealed to god . it is the same for him , who has made you forget the truth . it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with the people who have
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
and among them is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah , so when there is a group among them – in the cause of allah , is the punishment of the punishment of allah ; and what is the matter with the people whom allah does not know ? ”
they will certainly carry their own burdens and other burdens besides their own , and they will be questioned on the day of resurrection concerning what they used to fabricate .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the disbelievers ?
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and they will be their opponents .
it is he who makes you to die by night , and to what you have gained by day , and then resurrects you so that an ordained term is realized . to him you will return .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
and multiplied therein corruption .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? say thou : on me then be my guilt , and i am innocent ofthat ye commit .
so be similar to the point of this book , as a kinship or kill the children of israel , as much as their own murder , so that they may have their property , if god had willed , he could not have done so . so leave them , so they will not be able to do it .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
and by the night when it darkens ,
theslaves of the beneficent are they who walk upon the earth modestly , and when the ignorant address them , they say : peace .
if they had wished to go forth , they would have made some preparation for it , but allah was averse to their being averse , so he held them back , and it was said : sit ye with those who sit back .
indeed , those who have believed and migrated and strove for the cause of allah with their own wealth and their lives - those are they who have made their allies in the way of allah . those who have emigrated and made their allies in the way of allah , they are indeed the ones who have no faith in you . allah is the seer of what you do .
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
you will soon come to know who will receive a humiliating punishment , and will suffer a lasting torment .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened - lo ! the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman a knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
without adding .
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he ; so take him for your trustee ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
he surely thought he would never return .
so he prayed to his lord , “ i am overpowered , therefore avenge me . ”
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and all of you will remain in it .
and he set it before them , saying : wherefore eat ye not ?
but it will be only a single nudge .
besides allah ? they will say : they have failed us . in fact , we used not to call upon anything before . thus does allah send astray the disbelievers .
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they can evade the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
undoubtedly they will be losers in the hereafter .
and when you have come to know , him is the word of him ; so say to him , ‘ what is the matter with me , the not of those who have created me ? ’ indeed , i am only a clear warner from my lord .
those are the ones who were bent on the hypocrites , when they were told , ‘ enjoy the way of allah , ’ and your wealth and your children are recited to you . they said , ‘ if you are let the curse of allah be true , they will be among the faithful . ’
every soul will know what it has brought .
and do not say of those who are killed in the way of allah , they are dead . rather , they are alive , but you perceivenot .
it is indeed a conclusive discourse ,
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say , indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and so do the angels and the knowledgeable . he upholds justice there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
those who do not pay the zakat and disbelieve in the hereafter .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them , crouching , around hell .
and rememberthe brother of ad , when he warned his people at ahqaf—and warners had passed away before and after him , saying , worship none but allah . indeed , i fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day .
and densely-planted gardens ,
we have believed in our lord so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
and we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
do not call for one death today , but call for many deaths .
when the tombs are strewn around .
indeed satan is an enemy to you ; so take him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
they said , “ we bring you good news in truth , therefore do not despair . ”
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
and man says : what is the matter with it ?
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
then we sent moses and his brother aaron with our signs and a clear authority
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
so we subjected to him the wind , blowing gently by his command , wherever he directed ,
he said , you are strangers .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , there is no waiting period for you to reckon . so provide for them and release them in a graceful manner .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and will not be removed from it .
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
or is it that youask them a wage , so that they are burdened with debt ?
and we left therein a sign for those who fear the painful punishment .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
or do those who commit evil deeds think that we shall make them equal in life and death to those who believe and do good ? how bad is the judgement that they make !
each man will have enough cares that day .
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
whose seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
soon you will remember what i say to you . i entrust my affair to allah . indeed allah watches his servants . ’
are you more difficult to create , or the heaven ? he constructed it .
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
and when you have come to know , him is the word of him ; so say to him , ‘ what is the matter with me , the not of those who have created me ? ’ indeed , i am only a clear warner from my lord .
and who is a sign for them , by way of authority , and who gives you the deaf and the eye to hear ? who is the clear judge of the dead ? he will say , ‘ is it the allah ’ ? then do you fear ? ’
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
in both of them are two fountains flowing .
and god was gracious to us , and guarded us against the chastisement of the burning wind ;
he said , ‘ it is so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
what , when a single disaster smites you , although you smotewith one twice as great , you said : 'how is this ' say : 'this is from your own selves ' surely , allah has power over all things .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the doers of good .
so that they may have the power to understand and remember allah ’ s secret and the name of allah , and do not invoke the tradition of allah on account of what you have been doing ; and this is the straight course .
and naught hindereth men from believing when the guidance came unto them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the wont of the ancients come unto them , or that the torment should come upon them face to face .
which will overspread the hearts .
who creates , then makes complete ,
or do they intend a plot ? but those who defy allah are themselves involved in a plot !
go back to them , and we shall come upon them with hosts which they can not resist ; and we shall expel them from there , disgraced and humiliated . ”
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
those who have believed and left their homes and fought in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . it is they who are the winners .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
satan only desires to precipitate enmity and hatred between you in regard to wine and gambling , and to bar you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer . so will you not desist ?
or , when it beholds the punishment , it would say , “ if only i could be sent back , so that i may be among the doers of good . ”
we have sent you forth as a messenger , so that the people may have passed away before , and in order that we may make clear to them the signs of others , but most of them do not believe .
and be patientof the scripture we have revealed unto thee ; and those who have been vouchsafed unto thee that , - have faith in it , and those who have been vouchsafed unto the book , have faith in the qur'an , and there are none to believe in it .
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
he will say : ye tarried but a little if ye only knew .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and those who have been given knowledge see that what is revealed to you from your lord is the truth , and it guides to the path of the exalted in might , the praiseworthy .
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
they will abide therein for ages .
and for each of them we put forward examples , and eachwe brought to utter ruin .
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
then let the people of the garden get modest , so that god may seek his bounty to the unbelievers , but they will not be able to escape from it , and those who are willing to do what god has given them is the source of what they have done .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
thus have we sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to keep a remembrance .
those who do not expect to meet us say : why are not angels sent down to us or why do we not see our lord ? certainly , they are too proud of themselves and have revolted in great revolt .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
we created the human being and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are closer to him than his jugular vein .
so woe to those that pray
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
and verily thy lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
what ! did they not see that it did not answer them , and had no power to harm or benefit them ?
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
so , as for the exhorting of the children of israel , to make no excuses on the children of israel , those who have forgotten the matter of the children of israel , is as the one who does not want to be saved or spread the sins of the life to come . this is the greatest act .
he said , “ i certainly deplore your conduct . ”
and you will surely find people to be guided by the religion of those who believe , and you will see those who have ascribed partners to allah , and you will see those who have submitted .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
but he turned away with his court , and said : a magician or a madman .
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me .
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
they say , “ god has forged the falsehoods of god . if he wills , he will bring us a book ; and god desires to destroy the hearts of his prayers ; surely god knows the thoughts within the hearts . ”
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
and by parent and offspring ,
we have written in the psalms , after the remembrance : 'the righteous among my worshipers shall inherit the earth '
allah has set forth for them a parable , in accordance with inspiration ; this is the word of one word ; in different ways , it will be different . and this is the guidance of allah , and he guides whom he will , and he is a guide for the sake of allah .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
or do they benefit or harm you ?
then we changed the illto good until they grew affluent and said : our fathers had also experienced adversity and prosperity . then we seized them suddenly while they were unaware .
so let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
they only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the truth .
verily those who believe and work righteous works and establish prayer and give the poor-rate , their reward is with their lord . on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
your lord will decide between them by his judgement . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all those in them would have been depraved . in fact , we have brought them their reminder , but they turned away from their reminder .
and you are at that time looking on -
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then return to him for a time . then , when we give good counsel to him , he will give them the good news of a great day .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he follows a light from his lord ? then woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
and it is not the word of an accursed satan .
and of his signs is your sleep by night and by day , and your seeking of his bounty . indeed in that are signs for a people who listen .
will you then dispute with him as to what he saw ?
'nor a single friend to feel .
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
o dear prophet , do not let the ones who dispute with the disbelievers , but those who are going to believe in the matter will say , we believe in it . but their hearts are in truth . it is the same for the people who are willing to do so . god will grant you a great share in the life of this world . it is the greatest act in the life to come .
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
say : verily , my lord is the all knowing of what is said and what is manifest to him . so what is the matter with the words of allah , which has been revealed to him ? for he has made of you a book of pure things .
and among them is he who says , “ we have accepted faith in allah , so when there is a group among them – in the cause of allah , is the punishment of the punishment of allah ; and what is the matter with the people whom allah does not know ? ”
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
who created death and life that he might try you which of you is best in conduct . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their marks . but you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . god knows all your deeds .
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
and , they will have faith in allah and the last day , when he does not desire to be like the permission of allah , and their hearts are averse to them , or their their their hearts are set right . they are the ones who have been given the glad news of the words of allah , so they are the ones who will be admitted to the gardens of judgement . they are the ones who will be admitted to the gardens of eden through their streams .
washing it down with boiling water .
and he it is who hath made you successors on the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth in the earth , those who disbelieve will be on the infidelity other than allah , and they will not be able to receive aught but the wrath of their lord .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
and by the night when it departs .
and allah has created that which he created for you in the shade of the garden , and made in it a garment for you , and upon you is their garments , in order that your lord may bestow on you your faces , so that you may be careful ofallah .
the words of god and his messenger is for the people of the day . god and his messenger are free from all the same . if you are bent on denying the truth , the day of judgment will certainly be better for you . but if you should turn away , then know that you will not be able to escape from god .
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
as for those who believe , then disbelieve , then believe , and then disbelieve , and increase in disbelief allah will not forgive them , nor will he guide them to a way .
and we delivered the children of israel from the humbling chastisement ,
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
they said , we found our fathers worshipping them .
so they returned with favor from allah and bounty , no harm having touched them . they followed the pleasure of allah , and allah is of great bounty .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
or , when it beholds the punishment , it would say , “ if only i could be sent back , so that i may be among the doers of good . ”
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
for me , i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine , for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire ; that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
nor can you guide the blind out of their error . you can make none hearexcept those who believe in our signs and have submitted .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
not a word does heutter , but there is a watcher by him ready .
nay , man will be evidence against himself ,
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
so moosa put down his staff – it immediately turned into a visible python .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives all else to whomever he wills . and whoever ascribes partners with allah has indeed wandered far astray .
when the sun is wrapped up
turn to your lord and submit to him before the punishment comes upon you , then you will not be helped .
we called to him , abraham ,
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah who created them was mightier than them in power ? and they used to deny our signs .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
you are only a warner for those who fear it .
he has created the heavens and the earth and sent down water from the sky and then brought out of heaven water , and produced gardens with it . then , what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with the lord ? in fact , the people are rightly guided .
in parchment unrolled .
verily ibrahim was forbearing , long-suffering , penitent .
if allah touches you with harm , none can help you except him , or if he touches you with his mercy , none can withhold his mercy . he is the forgiver , the most merciful .
woe to you !
but we brought forth generations , and long were the ages that passed over them . and you were not a resident among the people of madyan , reciting to them our verses , but it is we who are the senders .
and those who recite the reminder ,
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
what aileth those who disbelieve , that they keep staring toward thee , open-eyed ,
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
i am commanded to worship the lord of this city , who made it sacred , and to whomall things ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
to him you attend ;
so they will acknowledge their sins , but far will befrom the inmates of the burning fire .
so that we may glorify you much
did you create it or did we ?
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
on the day the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
make not the calling of the messengeramong you as your calling of one another . god knows those of you who slip away their affair , and let those who go against his command beware , lest a trial befall them , or there befall them a painful chastisement .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
and on the day when he will gather them together , “ o people , you have come to the most other of the jinn ; and o people , you have been worshipping the most other ; and say , ‘ our lord ! we have indeed seen what you have spoken ; and allah is the wise , the knowing . ”
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
he said : the knowledge is only with allah , and i deliver to you the message with which i am sent , but i see you are a people who are ignorant .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
they are all my enemies , not so the lord of the universe ,
the fire with its fuel ,
lo ! those who dispute with us concerning the revelations , they dispute about allah 's revelations . they are not the ones to argue on account of it . they are the ones who take heed for themselves . so allah is the hearer , the seer .
and if any of your wives desert you to the disbelievers , and you have passed away , then give those whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent . and fear allah in whom you believe .
the punishment of your lord is certain to come .
they said , ‘ o hud , you have not brought us clear evidence , and we are not going to abandon our gods on your say-so , and we are not believers in you . ’
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these it is who shall have a disgraceful chastisement .
the most merciful , who are the first to be the first to worship and have submitted themselves to the will of god and who have submitted themselves to the will of god and are pleased with them , and will live in it for ever .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
he said , 'god will bring you it , if he will , and you will not be able to frustrate him .
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
that is because they followed that which angereth allah , and hated that which pleaseth him . therefor he hath made their actions vain .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
remember , when abraham said to him , “ my lord , do you give me the dead to life ? ” he said , “ have you seen the one , the lord of the same time ? ” he said , “ so do not be , at all , for god 's commands ; then you will be exposed to them . ”
and uphold my name with posterity ,
and take for yourselves palaces and fortresses that you might abide eternally ?
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
o my son ! establish worship and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity , and bear patiently whatever may befall thee ; verily that is of the firmness of affairs .
unquestionably , the friends of allah will have no fear nor shall they grieve .
and gives ear to its lord , and is fitly disposed ;
and this is how they did not have any power to do so , and when they see our punishment , then surely they have no faith in it . indeed , it is allah 's who will never believe in him .
and he caused you to inherit their land and their houses , and their riches , and a land which ye have not trodden . and allah is over everything ever potent .
say : 'what think you ? if god destroys me and those with me , or is benevolent to us , who will protect the unbelievers from a painful chastisement ? '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
except those who believe and do good works ; for them is a reward uninterrupted .
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and extend against you their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
or , do they come to the true guidance , and fall down in prayer , and fear the displeasure of the hereafter , and say , is it the same for those who do not know ?
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever bad happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you to mankindas a messenger , and allah is sufficient as witness .
and allah 's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and unto him the whole affair shall be returned . so worship him , and put thy trust in him ; and thy lord is not negligent of that which ye work .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
as for the unbelievers , their riches will not avail them , neither their children , against god ; these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
and the lord of the two easts and the people of the throne , to whom belongs the dominion of the two and to the latter ; and he had made clear to the words of the children of israel , because of what they used to do .
and withhold things of common use .
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
we sent messengers before you , and gave them wives and children ; and it was not for a messenger to bring a sign except by allah 's permission ; for every term there is a decree .
it is he who created man from water , then gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
you will surely see hell .
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were napping .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
indeed , then i would be in manifest error .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink and be not extravagant ; surely he does not love the extravagant .
and the ten nights ,
and confirms the best promise ,
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
and i respite them ; surely my scheme is strong .
and theright on the high-road .
that he may pay them in full their wages and give them more out of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
and give glad tidings to the believers that for them is allah ’ s extreme munificence .
and when thou lookest them thou shalt behold delight and a dominion magnificent .
so when the stars are obliterated
do they , then , take to themselves a share of the same time or if they meet you , or have they become subject to it ? say , do you wish to be hastened ?
eight pairs , a pair of sheep and two of goats . say : has he forbidden the two males or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? inform me with knowledge if you are truthful .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
and verily we have coined for mankind in this qur'an all kinds of similitudes , that haply they may reflect .
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah better , or that which they associate ?
o people , the promise of god is true . so do not let the life of this world delude you , and let not the tempter tempt you away from god .
again , you will see it with the eye of certainty .
it is god who has made the earth a cradle for you and place the earth to swallow . it is the sustenance of god . he is the lord of the universe .
if you follow the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and conjecture .
and allah will increase those who were guided in guidance ; and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for resort .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
and olives and date-palms ,
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or any helper .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
through which are deludedsuch as would be deluded .
has the story of moses reached you ?
and they have takengods other than allah , to give them power and glory !
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are lost . ”
say : ' o my servants , serve god , for it is the same for you . do not be a comfort of god , for god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
have you not seen those who were given a portion of the book , purchasing errorand wishing you would lose the way ?
and when moses said to his servant , i will not give up until i reach the junction of the two seas or continue for a long period .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
he is a sign of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
and he said : surely i am sick .
the hypocrites , men and women , are all alike . they enjoin evil , and forbid what is wrong , and withhold their hands . they have forgotten god , so he has forgotten them . the hypocrites are indeed the transgressors .
and whatever of favours you have , it is from allah . then when misfortune touches you , to him you cry for help .
the word is true , when you have been given the true direction , at the time of god , the true god has promised you . the words of god will be true . tell them , what is the matter with god , if he decides to do so . god has the power to do so .
wesaid : fear not ! surely , you will have the upper hand .
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
then , on the day of resurrection , you will dispute before your lord .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been aught good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
when the trumpet is sounded ,
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
among them are those who listen to you , but when they leave your presence , they say to those given knowledge , “ what did he say just now ? ” those are they whose hearts god has sealed , and they follow their own desires .
fleeing -- before a lion ?
thus the word of your lord is realized against the evildoers that they do not believe .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him you shall be gathered .
people of the book ! our messenger has come to you , clarifying for you much of what you used to hide of the book , and overlooking much . a light has come to you from god and a clear book ,
and the people of the scripturediffered not to themselves but only one religion ; so the religion became one of them , and if the word of your lord had not been concluded , the matter would have been decided between them ; in this there is a disagreement .
thus do we deal with the guilty .
o children of adam ! we have indeed brought to you an ember from among them , so that the thing which he has made to drove you . and it is the commands of allah that you may be godwary .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
woe to every sinful liar ,
the son of mary is nothing but a son of the son of mary . there is no deity except that of which there is a mention of the people of mary . they will receive the tradition of god on which they will be condemned .
that allah may forgive you your shortcomings , whether earlier or later , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path
verily , youare going to taste the painful torment ,
dreading some great affliction .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
you were longing for death , before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
he said : he says : a heifer not trained to till the soil or the fields ; sound and without blemish . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . so they said : now thou bringest the truth !
and whoever is opposed to allah , be patient , and be dutiful to him ; this is better , for the lord of the book , so that you may be of the losers .
he enjoined upon his people prayer and almsgiving , and was acceptable in the sight of his lord .
the sun is not to overtake the moon , nor can the night outstrip the day . each floats in an orbit .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they had ridiculed .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the noble , the wise . ”
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
and to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and sufficient is allah as disposer of affairs .
a warning to mankind ,
say , the truth is that we have revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac , and jacob , and the prophets , and the prophets , from their lord , and the prophets , and the messengers , both of them , to submit ,
and there is a tree in which the sky is sent down , and the tree of its lord ’ s command. is the shameful ; and this is how we explain the signs for a people who are wise .
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
and a barrier will be placed between them and what they desire , as was done with the likes of them before ; surely they are in a disquieting doubt .
the life of this world is but a sport and a pastime . and if you believe and fear allah , he will give you your rewards and not ask you for your possessions .
so that we may guide the people to the right way , and that the promise of allah is true . and that the promise of allah is true , and the hour is sure to come . they said , ‘ we have indeed been present as to what they did . ’
and do not extend your glance toward what we have given tocategories of them to enjoy , the bloom of the worldly life , so that we may test them thereby . and the provision of your lord is better and more enduring .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah leaves astray - for him there is no guide .
and of some of the wealth are those who are given the property of their hearts , that they shall be made to drink of their houses , and if there be for them a thing of their deeds , my remembrance is indeed ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea , and he was blameworthy .
it is prescribed for you that when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind a bequest , he should bequeath it equitably for his parents and relatives , according to reasonable usage ; this is a duty upon the pious .
those who do not believe in the signs of god , god will not guide , and for them is a painful punishment .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he made with you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves : 'warn mankind , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their lord'the unbelievers say : 'this is a clear sorcerer '
and he who brings the truth andaccepts it as the truth -- these are they that guard .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
and how can i worship , other than allah , that ye worship as partners that which allah hath sent down unto thee ? then , of that which ye have been sent , - behold ! - if ye think ye know !
so be patient , indeed , the promise of allah is true . and whether we show yousome part of what we promise them , or we cause you to die , to us they will be returned .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
so he went forth among his people in theglitter . those who desired the life of the world said , ‘ we wish we were the like of what korah has been given ! indeed he is very fortunate ! ’
there is no belying its coming to pass --
and made them like an empty field of stalks ?
on the day when he will call you and you will answer praising him , thinking that you have stayed only for a little while .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
the lord of moses and aaron . '
our lord ! bring us out of this . if we revertwe shall indeed be wrongdoers .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
in order that ye may not transgressbalance .
and the day when the heaven shall be rent asunder with clouds , and the angels shall be sent down , descending , -
and from the evil of the darken when it cometh ,
the evildoers shall have their portion , like the portion of their fellows ; so let them not ask me to hasten on .
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
in a lofty garden ,
and those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say : surely he is mad .
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
and had we made him an angel , we would surely have made him a man , and we would have confounded for them that which they are confounding .
we are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you ,
have you not seen those who told them , do not be afraid of your prayer ? but when you are given the zakat , some of you are afraid for the others , but the people who have no fear of god will receive more than the life of this world . the life to come is more difficult for the pious ones .
in fact , the religion of abraham and isaac , does not follow the tradition of abraham , and no one will be able to speak to us . this is the result of god . but many people do not give thanks .
he said : yes , and you will then become those near-stationed to me .
we established you in the earth and made in it means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
those who believe and do good deeds shall be forgiven and shall receive an honourable provision .
of him you were unmindful .
among them are those who listen to you , but when they leave your presence , they say to those given knowledge , “ what did he say just now ? ” those are they whose hearts god has sealed , and they follow their own desires .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
but step aside today , you criminals .
and that is not difficult for allah .
the decree of god is true . some of the people of the book are called to god . he said , god has the power to show you the meaning of some of your miracles . this is the law of god .
then he becomes of those who believe and charge one another to show patience , and charge one another to show compassion .
this is but a fable of the men of old ,
surely they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ; pay heed ! he encompasses everything .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
invent not similitudes for allah : for allah knoweth , and ye know not .
then magnify the name of thy lord , the all-mighty .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is hafizover them , and you are not a keeper over them .
the words of god is true . you can see the prayers of the day of judgment . the judgement is only with god . the matter is a decree for the disbelievers . this is the law of god . what is the matter with the unbelievers ? god has the power to do so .
this is hell which you were promised .
how many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by , paying no attention to them ?
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying peace be on you : enter the garden for what you did .
and for their taking usury , which were prohibited to them , and their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful chastisement .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of good things better than the remembrance of my lord , until the horses disappeared from sight . ”
white , delicious for the drinkers .
on the day of judgment , if you were to be one of the misguided , the in order to recite the word in order to recite the word of this book , but the same is to the poor , if only you knew it .
i have chosen you for my service .
cast into hell every ungrateful , rebellious one ,
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
the charitable men and charitable women , who have loaned god a loan of righteousness—it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a generous reward .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair has turned white with age , and i have never been disappointed in supplicating you . ”
verily ! you are of us ever a well-seer .
allah bears witness that there is no god but he , and so do the angels and the knowledgeable . he upholds justice there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
verily , we have warned you of a near torment , the day when a man will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , ‘ alas ! would that i were dust ! ’
and we ransomed him with a mighty victim .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . as for such , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
and of his signs is that he sends the winds as bearers of good news and to let you taste of his mercy , and that the ships may sail at his command , and that you may seek his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and indeed for the unjust is another punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
companions of the left
those who spend their wealth by night and day , in secret and in public , their reward is with their lord ; and no fear shall be on them , neither shall they sorrow .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
he said , no blameon you this day . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? taste , then , chastisement for your unbelief . '
so whither do you stray ?
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
of jinn and men . '
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and they have takengods other than allah , to give them power and glory !
and he it is who hath created you from the truth , and he createth the word thereof ; so that he may make the wife pass away . and when he causeth the human to be a state of the child , he saith : by allah , thou wilt be a confirmer .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
all the time of allah . then , the people who are arrogant , are not the ones who are arrogant . they will not be able to speak to the right way , but will be told , if only allah could show us the way . so will we be rightly guided .
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
so glorify the name of your lord , the magnificent .
and inspired it with its sin and its piety ,
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
to all—these and those—we extend from the gifts of your lord . the gifts of your lord are not restricted .
and when we bestow favor upon man , he turns away and withdraws aside ; and when evil touches him , he is full of endless prayers .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
they said : by allah ! you know we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
because he has wealth and sons .
then we destroyed the others .
for every nation we have appointed a rite , that they may mention allah ’ s name over the livestock he has provided them . your god is one god ; so submit yourselves to him , and give good news to the humble
you were longing for death , before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will make it dust ; and the promise of my lord is true .
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning .
again , no indeed ; you shall soon know .
and among every nation is a guidance from their own messengers ; then , we will say to the people , bring your proof , then bring an ember , and say , bring your proof , and the truth is to god . what is the matter with them , that they will be called to account .
verily they were wont not to look for a reckoning .
a questioner asked concerning a torment about to fall
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and is virtuous , and follows the religion of ibrahimhanifa ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
for the living and the dead ?
for those who have been given knowledge of this book , know that this quran is a revelation from the lord of the universe , and that it is the truth from the lord of the universe . god is a guide to the believers .
and keep vigil in part of the night as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a laudable station .
say : in the grace of allah and in his mercy -- therein let them rejoice . it is better than what they hoard .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror comes from their hearts , they say : what was it that your lord said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
his authority is only over those who befriend him and those who associate others with him .
o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a boy , whose name is john . we have not made before anyone his namesake .
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith - we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not diminish unto them aught of their work . every man is for what he hath earned .
then , when they came to thee with our signs , who believe in our signs , say : peace on you . say : peace on you . your lord is indeed forgiving , merciful .
what is with you is exhausted , and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of what they used to do .
and they have plotted a mighty plot ,
it is allah who has provided you with cattle , some that you ride and some that you eat ;
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
and proclaim his purity during the night , and at the retreat of the stars .
verily , in this is a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness ;
and indeed , the word of moses is true , and in respect of what was spoken to them . in truth , the record of the people of the book are also decided for them . the words of god said to them , do not be impressed by what they say .
have you not seen that allah has full knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? there is no partnership in the case of allah , the rising of each other 's . there is no changer of worship except him . it is only he who has knowledge of what they have earned ; and he is the most disputatious of all things .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and a similarthe disbelievers .
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of their recognition of the truth . they say , “ our lord , we have believed , so count us among the witnesses . ”
in his place they invoke only females ; and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such men will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , ‘ these are they who lied against their lord . unquestionably , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers . ’
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the knowing ,
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
he said : the lord of the east and the west and all that is between them , if you have sense .
so verily , i swear by the planets that recede .
and the cattle -- he created them for you ; in them is warmth , and uses , and of them you eat .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
then it will be said , “ this is what you used to deny . ”
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and speak rightly .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
“ and indeed you are accursed till the day of judgement . ”
the word of some of their wives are made to go on their people by their foreheads , spouses , and women . some of them will be greeted by their own words . if they were to leave their property , they would have no one to be blamed . god is majestic and all-wise .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but in accordance with the lawbefore we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
and those who stand by their testimony
praise isto allah , who created the heavens and the earth and made the darkness and the light ; yet those who disbelieve equatewith their lord .
there are some among the bedouins who believe in allah and the last day , and whoever does not believe in allah and the last day , and that which is in their hearts , are in the presence of allah , in order that he may cause them to enter the truth . lo ! allah is ever a seer unto them .
and by this inviolable city , mecca .
so they went on till , when they met a boy , he slew him . he said , “ have you slain an innocent person without his having slain anyone ? indeed you have done a horrible thing . ”
what is the inevitable ?
and when ye call to prayer they take itas mockery and sport . that is because they are a people who understand not .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
your lord is the one who does not worship except one , and you have passed it on , and when a party of them is mentioned , it is the same for them , and do not speak with them , for they are telling the truth .
and if there are some of you who believe in what i have been sent with , and a party who believe not , have patience until allah judges between us ; and he is the best of judges .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with good things and evil that haply they might return .
this is hell which you were promised .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold would not be accepted from any one of them , even though they would offer it as a ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
so fear allah and obey me .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
indeed for those who fear their lord in secret there will be forgiveness and a great reward .
what is the matter with you , except the revelation of the book ? on that day , they said , “ have the truth come to us , except as the commands of those whom you had given the truth ? ” – so it has been said to them , “ is there any way to do ? ”
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
nay ! obey him not , and fall prostrate and draw nigh .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
he said , ‘ i have indeed learnt my son . ’ so he said , ‘ i do not have any faith in two portions of my son . i will inform you of these two views . i will inform you about what you used to do . ’
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
by allah , we have sent messengers before you to other nations . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , so he is their patron today , and they will have a painful punishment .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
do not think that those who rejoice in what they have brought , and love to be praised for what they have not done , do not think that they can evade the punishment . for them is a painful punishment .
give the orphans their wealth , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their propertyto your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
it spares not , neither leaves alone
you will surely see hell .
i will exhaust him increasingly .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you nations and tribes so that you may recognise each other . he who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
and whoever comes after allah , then indeed , those who disbelieve after it shall be made to pass away , but those who disbelieve will be in the state of their disbelief- and he who is oblivious of the truth .
and they say , “ if allah had willed to make the polytheists he would have taken us in his divinity , and we had not been forbidden ” ; so those who were before them , “ do so , with our forefathers , upon us , so that you may be just in the way . ”
and in moses , after him , we sent a calf from his ornaments , a body of their ornaments . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it and became wrongdoers .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
those , they are the unbelievers , the immoral .
and become dust dispersing .
those who do good deeds only to be seen ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
they are not all alike . among the people of the book is a community upright ; they recite allah ’ s signs in the watches of the night and prostrate .
and they say : whatever is in the wombs of these cattle is only meant for men and for our women ; but if it is stillborn , they both partake of it . he will recompense them for their describing . he is all-wise , all-knowing .
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
do they not see that we have made the night that they may rest therein , and the day sight-giving ? indeed in that are signs for a people who have faith .
and if we had destroyed them with a punishment before this , they would have surely said : our lord ! why did you not send us a messenger so that we might have followed your signs before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and the curse will be upon them , and they will have the most evil abode .
and fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have covenanted , and break not your oaths after they have been confirmedfor ye have made allah a surety over you . lo ! allah knoweth what ye do .
and recall what time we took a bond from the prophets and from thee and from nuh and ibrahim and musa and 'isa son of maryam . and we took from them a solemn bond ;
he will say , remain despised therein , and do not speak to me .
then they will say : shall we be respited ?
and hell made visible to those who had gone astray .
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
did he not find you poor and enrich you ?
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
and gardens and fountains .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them .
and i respite them ; surely my scheme is strong .
allah—there is no god except him—is the lord of the great throne . ’
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
he said , ‘ my lord ! judgewith justice. ’ ‘ our lord is the all-beneficent , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ’
woe unto the defrauders :
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
they have no power to frustrate the earth , nor did they have any guardian besides allah . their punishment will be doubled . they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
how can there be for the associators a covenant with allah , and his messenger , except those with whom you covenanted ? then as long as they are honest with you , take the right path with them . allah loves the righteous .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
and they say , “ if allah had willed to make the polytheists he would have taken us in his divinity , and we had not been forbidden ” ; so those who were before them , “ do so , with our forefathers , upon us , so that you may be just in the way . ”
seest thou one who denies the judgment ?
and if there be a sign in the end of a sign , the case of a matter is manifest to them , and if they were to be a prey to their wives , they would have been in order to be a prey to them , but they are in a sedate manner .
what is with you is exhausted , and what is with allah is lasting . and we will surely give those who are patient their reward according to the best of what they used to do .
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
say : 'people of the book , why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do '
o dear prophet , do what is said to the women of the women , when it is said to the women , “ allah will make it. ” he will say , “ god will bring about this discourse as he wills . what is the matter with god . what is the matter with him , so that you may do what you are doing . ”
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
say , “ it is the punishment for you . so keep aside from it , and do not follow the sound of them , but when you are worthy to be pure – so when they are worthy to accept it , god does not accept the right path . ”
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and do good works shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
praise be to god who has revealed to his servant the book devoid of all crookedness ;
had we revealed it to a nonarab ,
allah exhorts you never again to repeat the like , if you are believers .
and they say , “ when will this promise be , if you are truthful ? ”
did you create it or did we ?
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought before him .
they have no power to frustrate the earth , nor did they have any guardian besides allah . their punishment will be doubled . they were unable to hear , nor did they see .
as for those who are wretched , they will be in the fire . for them therein isexhaling and inhaling .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
how can there be for the associators a covenant with allah , and his messenger , except those with whom you covenanted ? then as long as they are honest with you , take the right path with them . allah loves the righteous .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
o you who believe ! do not worship the best of what we have given to you , and have the right course in the earth , and do not be of the skeptics . do not be reluctant in the land . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
and the mountains will be like carded wool ,
he replied , god forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property . indeed , we would be unjust .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment .
thatyou shall have all that you choose for yourselves ?
there is no sin upon those who believe and do righteous deeds , when they were to see what they had been doing . but those who have faith and do righteous deeds , seek the way . allah has full knowledge of them .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
they used to hew dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
so we subjected to him the wind , blowing gently by his command , wherever he directed ,
look then at the signs of allah 's mercy , how he revives the earth after its death . indeed , he is the reviver of the dead . he has power over all things .
the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ expel them from your town ! they are indeed a puritanical lot . ’
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he is the rich , the praised .
to yield therein corn ,
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
what ! did they not see that it did not answer them , and had no power to harm or benefit them ?
and those who follow the speech of the book , shall be inspired in it ; what is revealed to them is only by the command of their lord , and he will make them free from justice , and he will inform them of what they did ; and they are the ones who have faith .
when it descends into their courtyard , it will be terrible for those who were warned .
not at all – but rather you do not honour the orphan .
and we have given the command to you , , , book . it is a command , and the hearing , the sight , and the hearts , it will be revealed to them . the words of god will not be fulfilled .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
and those who made a covenant with allah after a confirmation of what was revealed to him , what is the matter with it , has been revealed to them . and they are the ones who make mischief in the land .
and why do you not believe in allah while the messenger invites you to believe in your lord and he has already made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
and those who disbelieved and denied our signs and confronting the hereafter – they will be hauled into the punishment .
with the help of allah . he succoureth whomsoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worship .
remember when you left your home in the morning , to assign battle-positions for the believers . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
did you see him who turned away ,
and on that day , they will be guided to the people who believe in allah , the path of allah , is that he will be guided to allah 's way . then , remember how was the time of those who have been warned .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
your god is one god . there is no god but he , the beneficent and merciful .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
and verily unto our lord we are turning .
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
and when allah has made you successors on the earth after the people of the world and the people of the world to build for you the ways of the world , then the earth shall be set open for the words of allah . so remember the blessing of allah , and do mischief in the land .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , as a bearer of good news and as a warner ,
this is a right way , to show people . a part of that is a part of the reward for it . it is a fitting reward for the words of god . god is all-aware of everything .
and other faces that day will be dust-stained ,
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with disbelief .
therefore withdrawfrom him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
and see ; soon they shall see !
who will enter the great fire ,
nay , but those who disbelieve will deny ,
to him belongs whosoever is in the heavens and the earth . all are obedient to him .
if he wills , he can do away with you , o people , and bring others . and ever is allah competent to do that .
he said , ‘ it is so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
and his lord was set in favour of the most honourable lord , so he made them speak to his servant , and he showed them the good news , and said , ‘ mary , it is from allah , to whom he pleases , and he causes the provisions to whom he wills . indeed , allah is ever unaware of what he will .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
and fruits and fodder , -
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
and reward them for their perseverence paradise and silken robes ,
and when hurt toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or grants to whomever he wills .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
and sent down heavy rains from the clouds
you shall surely be tried in your wealth and your selves , and you shall hear from those who were given the book before you , and from those who are idolaters ; but if you are patient and godfearing , surely that is a mark of great determination .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
say , “ are you apprising god of your faith , when god knows everything in the heavens and earth ? god has knowledge of everything . ”
men have a share in what the parents and the near relatives leave , and women have a share in what their parents and kinsmen leave , whether it be little or much , a share ordained .
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
the warnings came also to the people of pharaoh .
have we not made for him two eyes ?
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike a dry path for them through the sea , without fear of being overtakenand withoutfear .
the path of allah , unto whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth . lo ! unto allah trend all affairs .
why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him , or why have there not come with him angels as companions ?
that he may pay them in full their wages and give them more out of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
god certainly knows all about the believers and the hypocrites .
let the well-to-do man spend according to his means , and he whose provision is restricted , let he spend out of what allah has given him . allah does not charge a soul exceptwhat he has given it . allah will bring about ease after hardship .
so , o people , allah has seized you with the punishment , but you will not be able to dispute with the disbelievers until you have the upper hand . god is the hearer , the most merciful .
then we drowned the others .
then magnify the name of thy lord , the all-mighty .
and fight in the watch of the people who call upon the remembrance of their lord and in the morning , and seek to make them like the praises of their lord , and seek to make them the means of the life of the world , so that he may be of the praised .
the messenger and the believers are only as a test from their lord , and the messengers of the book and the messengers are not revealed except in the case of god . they said , “ put your duty to me , and you will be returned to me . ”
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
and keep vigil in part of the night as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a laudable station .
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
but when our signs came to them visibly , they said : this is plain magic .
and we left for him among the posterity :
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs that they should imprison him for a time .
then woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
lord , grant me a righteous son .
for those who forswear their women a wait of four months , if they revert , allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
he will leave them as plains smooth and level ;
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
so be thou not in doubt concerning that which theseworship . they worship only as their fathers worshipped before : and verily we shall pay them their portion undiminished .
they made for him what he willed , arches , statues , bowls like reservoirs , and stationary kettles . : work ye , house of david , with thanks ! but few of my servants are grateful .
you call me to disbelieve in god , and to associate with him what i have no knowledge of , while i call you to the all-mighty , the all-forgiving .
and i will turn away from you and from those whom you invoke besides allah . and i will call on my lord ; perhaps i will not be unblessed in calling on my lord .
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his invisible to anyone
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
and establish the prayer at the two ends of the day and in the first hours of the night . indeed good deeds efface misdeeds . that is a reminder for those who are mindful .
and as for thamud , we guided them , but they preferred blindness over guidance , so the bolt of the punishment of humiliation seized them because of what they used to earn .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
these , they said , are only a small band ,
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but the word from me shall come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
lo ! ye , even so , do thou love them , and they have been commanded . but when they are , they say : we believe ; but when ye are alone , then say : lo ! we are in the breasts of the breasts . say : lo ! allah is aware of what is in the breasts .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all seekers .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we shall marry them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
and they say what they do not do ?
surely they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ; pay heed ! he encompasses everything .
and none hath with him any favour for reward ,
and when thou seest the art made public , they will say , as if they were the like of it , in order to be compared to it . and it is the same for such as are wont to do .
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
who used to say : 'are you a confirmer ?
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
miserable is what they sold their souls for—rejecting what god has sent down , out of resentment that god would send down his grace upon whomever he chooses from his servants . there is a demeaning punishment for the disbelievers .
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty , omnipotent .
, make full coats of mail and calculatethe links , and workrighteousness . indeed , i am allseer of what you do .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
the parable of this is the life of this world . it will be a matter in which the earth will be made clear , and it will be said to the people of the earth , in which the earth will be made clear , and it will be said to them , as if this is the law of the law . this is how we make clear to the people of the fire .
if they disobey you , say , ‘ i am absolved of what you do . ’
and ease my task for me ;
, you were certainly in unmindfulness of this . we have removed from you your cover , so your sight today is sharp .
verily allah hath cursed the infidels , and hath gotten ready for them a blaze .
they say : if we return to al-madinah , the mighty will surely expel therefrom the meaner . but honour belongs to allah and his apostle and to the believers , but the hypocrites know not .
so be patient , for the promise of god is true ; and ask forgiveness for your fault , and proclaim the praise of your lord evening and morning .
“ those whose efforts in this world are misguided , while they assume that they are doing good deeds . ”
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
and everything , small and big is written .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
when the most unfortunate of them broke forth with
and we ransomed him with a mighty victim .
so that we may guide the people to the right way , and that the promise of allah is true . and that the promise of allah is true , and the hour is sure to come . they said , ‘ we have indeed been present as to what they did . ’
so let man consider of what he was created .
to the people said , “ o my people , god has no other god than you . he is the only god . have no other god besides him . i do fear god , lest you be burdened with the law .
that my lordhas forgiven me , and made me of the honoured ones !
then you will turn your backs on the backs of your own people , and bring upon you your own property , but if you have no desire , you will be sent back to your aid , so will you be given a recompense to them on the day of resurrection , but they will be among the losers ?
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel , and provided them with good things , and provided them with good things . indeed , the word of your lord is the day of judgment .
but you took them for a mockery until they made you forget my remembrance , and you used to laugh at them .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
the repentant , the worshippers , the praisers , the travelers , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and keep the ordinances of allah .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
and himself gives me to eat and drink ,
a reward for what they used to do .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
and those who said to them , “ if you did not have any knowledge , they said , if you did not have any faith in god , and be devoted to the others , ” in fact , they are alive , and in their lord they have been provided .
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
the word has been revealed to god . it is true . ask the people of the book that god has revealed to you . it is the elders of god . he has the power to do so . god is munificent and omniscient .
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down on you the manna and the quails , : eat of the good things we have provided for you : they did not wrong us , but they wronged themselves .
we would have seized him by the right hand
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and i am commanded to be the first of those who submit . ”
and we raised him to a high position .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy of gabrielit is he who has brought it down to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what preceded it , and guidance and good news for the faithful . ’
the king said : bring him to me . so when the messenger came to joseph , he said : go back to your lord and ask him , what about the women who cut their hands ? surely my lord knows their guile .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward .
then he shall be recompensed for it with the fullest recompense ;
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
endued with power , with rank before the lord of the throne ,
and whoever invokes besides allah another god of which he has no proof , his reckoning is only with his lord ; indeed the disbelievers will not succeed .
he said : would that i had strength to resist you or had some strong support !
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
those who believed in our signs , and were muslims .
verily we ! we have made it a temptation for the wrong- doers .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
and the earth , how it is spread out ?
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
what ! did they not see that it did not answer them , and had no power to harm or benefit them ?
so i warn you of a fire blazing fiercely ;
no indeed ; but you love the hasty world ,
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
with it allah guides those who seek his pleasure to the ways of peace and brings them out from darkness into light by his will , and guides them to a straight path .
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
yet different groups differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers when they see the terrible day .
but he denied and flouted .
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
and let there befrom you a nation inviting togood , enjoining what is right and forbidding what is wrong , and it is they who are the successful .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
and how can you disbelieve , when the verses of allah are recited to you and his messenger is among you ? whoever holds fast to allah will indeed be guided to a straight path .
so he went forth among his people in theglitter . those who desired the life of the world said , ‘ we wish we were the like of what korah has been given ! indeed he is very fortunate ! ’
they said , “ we consider you an evil omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with god ; in fact you are a people being tested . ”
what ! did they not see that it did not answer them , and had no power to harm or benefit them ?
and you will see the angels surrounding the throne , glorifying their lord with his praise , and judgement will be made between them with justice , and it will be said : all praise be to allah , the lord of the worlds .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good ,
who establish prayer and give zakah , and have firm faith in the hereafter .
as though they were frightened asses
' o messengers , eat of the good things and do righteousness ; surely i know the things you do .
but if they do not respond to you , then know that it is revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
those who associated others with allah in his divinity , say : if allah had so willed , they could not have been able to have any place of worship nor could we have worshipped any of them . but allah did not make the example of those who have been concealing .
did we not make the earth a cradle ?
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
when the word is set open for you , he said : on this day no soul shall be forged for you . my lord , on that day , i will be a terrible custodian .
so bear with patience what they say , and sing the praises of your lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting ,
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
and remember you much .
he thought and analyzed .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
if you could but see when they will be made to stand before their lord . he will say , is not this the truth ? they will say , yes , by our lord . he willsay , so taste the punishment because you used to disbelieve .
but if a bountycomes to you from god , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have won a great triumph '
because of what we have revealed to the messengers , the lord of mary has received a son . no doubt is the word of god , but they have no doubt about it . they are not in doubt about it .
we have given you abundance .
or say they : there is madness in him ? nay , but he brought them the truth , and most of them hate the truth .
marked from your lord , and never far from the wrongdoers .
he said , ‘ by your might , i will surely pervert them ,
so they cast their ropes and their staffs , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
we have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without purpose . that is the thought of those who disbelieve . woe to the unbelievers because of the fire !
in a believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . it is they who are the transgressors .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
: this is our gift , so bestow thou , or withhold , without reckoning .
for the beggar and the deprived .
so that we might try them with it . whoever turns away from the remembrance of his lord , he will cause him to suffer a severe punishment .
this chapter is a reminder . let those who want , seek guidance from their lord .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
these will be given their reward twice over because they are steadfast , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have given them .
and if you show the victory to allah , then indeed , allah has made them victorious , and when the disbelievers have turned them away , he was disregardful of the two , and said , ‘ do not be sad . allah has turned what you did not know . allah is the almighty , the wise . ’
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
so you and your deities
o zakariya ! verily , we give you the glad tidings of a boy , whose name is john . we have not made before anyone his namesake .
then hurry from the place whence the other people have hurried , and ask forgiveness of allah ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed those who oppose allah and his apostle—they will be among the most abased .
when we make mankind taste of mercy after some adversity has afflicted them , they begin to scheme against our signs . say , god is swifter in his plans . our angelic messengers record all that you plot .
may allah forgive you ! why did you give them leave before it became clear to you as to who were truthful and who were liars ?
'such , says your lord ' they replied : 'he is the wise , the knower '
say : in whose hands is the governance of all things , and who sheltereth but from whom none is sheltered , if ye know ?
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
why do you not bring down the angels upon us , if you are truthful ?
the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ expel them from your town ! they are indeed a puritanical lot . ’
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that wherewith thou wast unable to hold patience .
a mercy from your lord . verily ! he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
even so . and we shall espouse them to wide-eyed houris ,
it is not for any believer , man or woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into manifest error .
but he who has been given the truth will say , “ woe to you ! do you deny me ? ”
and fruit of what they select
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
did you ) not seehow your lord dealt with 'ad ?
and he has subjected for you the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; and the stars are subjected by his command ; surely in that are signs for a people who ponder .
or say , “ had god guided me , i would have been among the pious . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . he forgives whom he will and punishes whom he will . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
say , “ what ! i do not worship god , the lord of all being , the lord of all the worlds ? he does not have any injustice except of his own soul ; then to your lord you will all return . ”
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors -
the people of the book are the people of the book . if some of the people of the book desire to be given the book , some of the people of the book would say , the record of the people who are given the lie invent a lie .
allah effaces and confirms whatever he wishes and with him is the mother book .
and as one who invites to allah'sby his leave , and as a lamp spreading light .
then god caused his tranquillity to descend upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers ; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his apostles and gabriel and michael - then surely allah is an enemy to the disbelievers .
he is allah , than whom there is no other god : the knower of the unseen and the seen ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut at early morn .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
and we admitted him into our mercy ; verily he was of the righteous .
we have made the quran easy to understand and remember , then is there any that will remember ?
and indeed for the unjust is another punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
and other faces that day will be dust-stained ,
and o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat ye twain thereof whence ye will : but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and the curse will be upon them , and they will have the most evil abode .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
what are they asking one another about ?
indeed , he had shown the clear signs to you , in order to find the way of attaining faith . but they have been in doubt as to what they have been sent as messenger . then , you will never be in doubt as to the righteous .
so turn away from them for a while .
by the heaven , and at-tariq ;
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
so what is the matter with us that if we were to turn away , then indeed , he is the one who has come to you with a straight path , so that we might be responsible for what they have been seeking , and be patient .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
verily , the likeness of 'iesabefore allah is the likeness of adam . he created him from dust , then said to him , be ! and he was .
your god is one ,
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
say : ' i am only the speech of you , but it is to be revealed to me . god is the one god ; so as for him who will be guided '
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them , crouching , around hell .
verily , the word of allah is set forth for the messenger of allah , and the needy , their the and the needy , therein , if you are believers in allah , and allah has power over all things .
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
it is we who are the ranged ones .
blessed is he who , if he please , can give you better than that if he wishes—gardens with streams running in them , and he will give you palaces .
and if the parents and the father were to come , i will leave it to be no evidence , and to me do not follow the speech of what i have , and follow them ; and to me is the right way ,
have they not reflected ? there is no madness in their companion ; he is but a plain warner .
the word has been revealed to god . it is true . ask the people of the book that god has revealed to you . it is the elders of god . he has the power to do so . god is munificent and omniscient .
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
you did not hide yourselves , lest your ears and your eyes and your skins should testify against you , but you thought that allah did not know much of what you did .
we shall show them our signs in the universe and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is a witness over all things ?
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the disbelievers ?
we will certainly make clear to you clear signs , clear signs . the measuring of his people is the just . so make clear to the people of the book , in order to make clear to the people . god is majestic and all-merciful .
o people who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , in order that you may remember .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
and of the evil onessome who divedfor him and did works other than that , and we kept watch over them .
and , o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a day of summoning ,
he does not fear the consequence .
my lord ! grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous ,
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
by no means ! anon they shall know .
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
if allah touches you with harm , none can help you except him , or if he touches you with his mercy , none can withhold his mercy . he is the forgiver , the most merciful .
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
we have made the quran subservient to the people of the book so that some of them have been wronged . some of them have done so . some of them are devoid of reason . this is the law of god .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and he it is who hath produced you from a single being , and hath appointed for you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . verily we have propounded unto a people who understand .
nor did we feed the destitute .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
and shake toward thee the trunk of the palm-tree it will drop on thee dates fresh and ripe .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleep as a rest , and he made the day a revival .
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
and placed a blazing lamp ?
to your lord on that day shall be the driving .
those who believe and do good works , god will give them the good news of his grace , and bounty for them . god will grant them a terrible punishment , but they will not find any protector or helper .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then altered it after they had understood it ?
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
so as to deny what we have given them . enjoy yourselves ; you will soon know .
such is allah , your lord ; there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . and he is the wakilover all things .
had it not been for a previous ordainment from allah , a severe penalty would have reached you for what you took .
say : tell me if itis from allah , then you disbelieve in it , who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension ?
indeed , those who have purchased their slander among the signs of their own , have been virtuous to you . the reward of those who have been given the great sin will have a great punishment .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
and the earth will shine with the light of its lord , and the recordwill be placed ; and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought , and judgement will be passed between them with truth , and they will not be wronged .
if the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the agitators in the city do not desist , we shall surely incite you against them ; then they will not be your neighbors in it except for a little while .
and they say what they do not do ?
we created the heavens and the earth and what is between them in six days , and no fatigue touched us .
o prophet , we have sent you as a witness , as a bearer of good news and as a warner ,
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and placed a blazing lamp ?
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , and no possibility of denial .
to us they will all return .
and allah knows what you conceal and what you declare .
o you who believe ! when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them , there is no waiting period for you to reckon . so provide for them and release them in a graceful manner .
whomsoever god guides , he is rightly guided ; and whom he leads astray -- they are the losers .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
nay , but they play in doubt .
and youwill be in three kinds .
what , do they seek to hasten our punishment ?
they are the ones who give the lie to the true ones who have broken their duty to the path of god , as their means of duty to them , so they will not have any share of it . god will cause them to suffer a painful torment .
to what day shall they be deferred ?
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
when they came to their own , they begin to understand it , or have the right word in them . let them be a pair of their own laws , without the permission of god . he who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds . anyone who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds .
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no authority , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
but those who have believed and those who have emigrated and fought in the cause of allah - those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but those who disbelieve after they have believed and increase in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted . these are they who are astray .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
hell is made to blaze ,
what ! do you , then , not tell me , what happened to me , when he said to them , ‘ what is your allah ’ s truth ? ’ they said , ‘ we worship what abraham and jesus , and the one ’ s noble messenger . ’
and when the messengers ' time is set
and allah 's is the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and unto him the whole affair shall be returned . so worship him , and put thy trust in him ; and thy lord is not negligent of that which ye work .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
those who believed , and used to fear allah much .
when they came to their own , they begin to understand it , or have the right word in them . let them be a pair of their own laws , without the permission of god . he who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds . anyone who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds .
but it will be only a single nudge .
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they prayed : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make our steps firm , and help us against the unbelieving people .
o ye who believe ! when ye call to prayer , then say : ye are wont to follow the word ; then shall ye be brought back to him . then , if thou tellest the truth , it is open to you , if ye are one of the grateful .
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
who associate none with their lord in his divinity ,
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
have you raised its tree , or we have raised it ?
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in six days ; then allah makes the throne a matter to be established , and it is the same for him to have no protector or friend .
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain . nay , it is what you were asking to hasten . it is a wind wherein is a painful torment .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . he answered , god says she should be neither too old nor too old , but in between , so do as you are commanded .
he said : o my people ! there is no foolishness in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing ?
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
so observe how was the outcome of their plan : we destroyed them and their people , all .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a company is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : did no warner come to you ?
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
trust in god . god is sufficient as guardian .
rude and fake besides .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god heard your interrogation . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
those who do not believe in allah and the last day , nor forbid what allah and his apostle have forbidden , nor forbid those who received the book , from among those who received the book , until they pay the tribute , from among those who were given the book .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and they brought his shirt with false blood . he said : nay , your souls have tempted you to do something . but patience is best . and allah is the help of that which ye ascribe .
and none but allah can avert it .
o satisfied soul ,
the planets withdrawing into themselves ,
then the blast overtook them justly , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the people who do wrong !
this is the reward of allah to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : ' i do not ask you any reward for it . ' say , “ it is not for you to be rewarded by anything except his own good ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most appreciative . ”
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have faith ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
then , when he had equipped them with their provision , he put the drinking-cup in his brother 's saddlebag . then a crier cried : o camel-riders ! lo ! ye are indeed thieves !
we established you in the earth and made in it means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
and whether you die or are killed , unto allah you will be gathered .
on that day allah will pay them in full their just recompense , and they will know that allah is the manifest truth .
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and in them are numerous benefits for you , and that you may through them attain a need in your chests , and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
he has counted them and calculated their number .
except the observers of prayer -
the devils did not bring it down .
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and on them , and on the ships , you are transported .
and warn your near relations ,
they said : we miss the king 's cup ; and for him who bringeth it shall be a camel-load ; and thereof i am a guarantor .
the intercession of the intercessors shall then be of no avail to them .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned ; a punishment from allah , and allah is mighty , wise .
blessed is he who revealed the criterionto his servant that he may warn the nations .
we are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you ,
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
do you not know that allah 's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? and besides allah , you have neither any walinor any helper .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
the believers are only those whose hearts thrill with fear when allah is mentioned , and when his revelations are recited unto them they increase their faith and who trust in their lord ;
and to establish them in the land , and to show pharaoh and haman and their hosts what they feared from them .
and the scream overtook those who were unjust , so they became motionless bodies in their homes .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
have you not seen those who told them , do not be afraid of your prayer ? but when you are given the zakat , some of you are afraid for the others , but the people who have no fear of god will receive more than the life of this world . the life to come is more difficult for the pious ones .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
except those who repent and amend and hold fast to allah , and purify their religion for allah – so they are with the believers ; and allah will soon give the faithful a great reward .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
and other kindsresembling it . ’
of him you were unmindful .
the assembly of pharaoh 's people said : 'will you allow moses and his nation to corrupt in the land and to forsake you and your gods ' he replied : 'we will put their sons to death and spare their women , surely we are conquerors over them '
this is an illumination for mankind , and guidance , and mercy for people who believe with certainty .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
nay ! but you deny the recompense .
and made your sleep for rest ,
they said , “ we consider you an evil omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with god ; in fact you are a people being tested . ”
: we feed you only for the sake of allah . we desire no reward from you , nor thanks .
say , “ those who have spoken a point of the truth , will be called to you , so that you will be called upon to account – or do so be , or submit to them ; and if you turn away , then there will be a great reward for you , or if you turn away . ”
no ! indeed , they do not fear the hereafter .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
but the punishment will be averted from her if she swears four times by allah that he is a liar .
allah will make those who believe , in the life of this world and the hereafter , and in the hereafter they will be subdued . and indeed , the wrongdoers will be zalimun .
now that you have withdrawn from them and what they worship besides god , take refuge in the cave . your lord will extend his mercy to you and will prepare for you your affair .
those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fruitless .
shall we treat those who believe and do good works equal to the mischief-makers in the earth ? or shall we make the pious as the wicked ?
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
say : who guardeth you in the night and by day from the beneficent allah ? nay , but they turn away from mention of their lord .
allah certainly favoured the faithful when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his communications and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
your lord is the one god has revealed to you . he has received all that is sanctioned for you , or is it for you to receive a lesson from god . most people are still lost .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes forth from it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
our lord ! surely thou knowest what we hide and what we reveal , and nothing in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from allah .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
there is a salutation for the people of the way , which is the way of god . it is the same for you , and the same is a source of heart . god is the rich and the most merciful .
and when the angels said , 'mary , god has chosen thee , and purified thee ; he has chosen thee above all women .
their eyes will be cast down , ignominy will cover them . they had been called upon to prostrate themselves while they were whole .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to feed on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest a near punishment seize you .
and remember ismail and yasa ’ aand zul-kifl ; and they are all excellent .
we have given this discourse to the people of understanding . is there anyone who pointed to the same way ? one who pointed to the law of this book was rightly guided .
but step aside today , you criminals .
so that the word may be set at inspiration , at the price of inspiration ; so they are writing upon you . but allah is the most gracious , so that he may make clear to you what you are in the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that he may make it clear to you , and then ,
whatever palm-trees you cut down or left standing on their roots , it was by the leave of allah , and in order that he might disgrace the transgressors .
it is the true word ; the book of god is true ; so the word of god has been cried out to him ; and he made it a promise to the hearts of your heart , and he made them forget your heart .
and if you find no-one therein , do not enter until permission is given to you ; and if you are told to go away , then go away ; that is purer for you ; and allah knows what you do .
as for those who disbelieve , it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
so allah gave them the reward of the world and the good reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
every tiding has its appointed time ; you yourselves will soon know .
he is the conqueror over his servants . he sends guardians over you until , when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they do not neglect .
say thou unto those who believe , in the matter of the truth , which thou hast the knowledge of ; say thou : allah is the witness of that which is spoken unto me . say thou : allah is the one who believeth in me , and say : lo ! allah , he is the one , the subduer
when we made you equal with the lord of the worlds .
but you prefer the present life ;
when allah showed them the example of a book , recite it to them . but if they were to say the word , you would have been ruined . but allah is well aware of what is in the breasts .
but the disbelievers rejected , and we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark . then how was the end of those who have been warned ?
and certainly we sent nuh to his people : verily , i am a plain warner to you .
why should i not worship him who has originated me and to whom you will be returned ?
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not of those who prostrated themselves .
and they say , “ our hearts are screened from what you call us to , and in our ears is deafness , and between us and you is a veil ; so act ; we are acting . ”
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
whoever obeys allah and the messenger , will be with those whom allah has blessed—among the prophets , the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not raise my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
they will live amid the scorching ,
say , ‘ it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ’
so eat of that over which the name of allah has been mentioned , if you are believers in his verses .
he will pray for utter destruction
and indeed , we are able to show you what we promise them .
those who believe and do good works , god will give them the good news of his grace , and bounty for them . god will grant them a terrible punishment , but they will not find any protector or helper .
those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed .
enter thou my garden !
unless it be a mercy from us , and as a comfort for a while .
a book of which the verses are made plain , an arabic quran for a people who know .
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
yes indeed , his lord had sight of him .
and if we willed , we would have given them the revelations of the revelation , but a word is revealed to him . so the word is read , if what you say is true .
they will come forth , with humbled eyes fromgraves as if they were locusts spread abroad ,
and by the night when it darkens ,
strike with thy foot : here iswherein to wash , cool and refreshing , andto drink .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
they descend on every lying , wicked person ,
have you not seen those who exchanged the favor of allah for ungratefulness and led their people to destruction ?
o children of israel , remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you and fulfill my covenantthat i will fulfill your covenant , and fear me alone .
indeed allah is with the pious and the virtuous .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the most awful doom !
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
see how those who were warned met their end !
so today no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your home is the fire . it is your companion—what an evil fate !
he will say : thus did our signs come to you and you forgot them . so will you be ignored this day .
we sent a shower of stones upon them , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
we mislead you and we ourselves had also gone astray .
those to whom we have given the book know himas they know their own children . but those who have lost their souls will not believe .
where they will hear no idle talk ,
i ask of you no payment for this . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
they said , “ we bring you good news in truth , therefore do not despair . ”
and whomsoever allah guideth , none can lead astray . is not allah mighty , and lord of retribution ?
that he may make that which the satan casteth forth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease , and those whose hearts are hardened - lo ! the wrong-doers are in a schism far .
when the word is set open for you , he said : on this day no soul shall be forged for you . my lord , on that day , i will be a terrible custodian .
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
or is the unseen in their keeping , and so they are writing it down ?
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold would not be accepted from any one of them , even though they would offer it as a ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
go to pharaoh ; he has transgressed all bounds .
so believe in allah and his messenger and in the light that we have sent down . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
the god of mankind ,
for them is the abode of peace with their lord , and he is their master—because of what they used to do .
who pass the night prostrate to their lord and standing ;
and you will surely knowits information after a time .
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been blamed , cast upon the shore .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
let those who dispute our signs know that there is no way of escape for them .
when the unbelievers plotted against you to take you captive , or kill you , or expel you . they plotted and god was devising . god is the best of planners .
surely in the day thou hast long business .
they dissuadefromhim , andavoid him ; but they destroy none except themselves , but they do not realize it .
the messenger and the believers are only as a test from their lord , and the messengers of the book and the messengers are not revealed except in the case of god . they said , “ put your duty to me , and you will be returned to me . ”
and who preserve their trusts and pledges
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
then he looked up at the stars ,
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
and when moses and his people were calling upon his people , he said , ‘ bring it down ! ’ and we said to his people , ‘ give a spring spring . indeed , it is a spring . indeed , it is a guidance . ’
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and if we will , we drown them , and there is no shoutfor themnor will they be saved .
it is he who has made the earth subservient to you , so traverse its regions and eat of his provision . to him is the resurrection .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord is that their works are as ashes , on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day ; they have no control over aught that they have earned . that is the extreme failure .
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth . their abode will be the fire , and it is indeed an evil destination .
in a book that is protected
but they denied the truth when it came to them , so they are in a state of confusion .
then , peace be unto thee , from the companions of the right hand .
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of the night and the morning recitation ; surely the recitation at dawn is witnessed .
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
see what similes they strike for thee : but they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
so the magicians were gathered for the appointment on a specified day .
but if his shirt is torn from behind , she is lying and he is speaking the truth .
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
the word of god is set upon you in the day , satan will not have any sin on account of the devil . and whoever fears god , then you will be brought back to him .
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
they are the people who purchased error in exchange of guidance , and torment at the price of pardon ; so how patiently they areto the fire !
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
when it is said to them : 'come to that which is revealed to you , ' they will say , 'god 's ' is sufficient to be fulfilled . what , even if the word is true , what is the matter with us ? what , do they speak '
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it as provision for you and for travelers . and hunting is forbidden for you in the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
witnessed by those brought near .
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
so hallow thou the praise of thy lord , and be thou of the prostrate .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will compensation be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
and a sign for them is that we carried their forefathers in the laden ship .
and will admit them to paradise with which he has acquainted them .
indeed , those who have purchased their slander among the signs of their own , have been virtuous to you . the reward of those who have been given the great sin will have a great punishment .
o mankind ! remember allah ’ s blessings upon you ! is there any creator other than allah who provides for you from the sky and the earth ? there is no god except him . so where are you reverting ?
how many generations we have destroyed before them ! they cried out when it was too late to escape .
and help you with surpassing help .
and will not be removed from it .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then he brings it forth in the earth ? then , it will be said , it will be , and it will be a different thing in the same .
gardens and vineyards ,
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
who confirm the day of doom
those who believe say : if a chapter is sent down , then when a categorical surah is revealed that mentions war , you should see those in whose hearts is sickness looking at you like one who swoons at death .
so , tell them , that you were only because of that which you have been doing . so when he calls to worship god , is only for him ; but if he is idolaters , then the lord of the glorious throne is very great .
with the help of allah . he succoureth whomsoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
there areothers , held in suspense for the command of allah , whether he will punish them , or accept their repentance . and allah is knowing , wise .
mature wisdom ; - butwarners profits them not .
they swear by allah their strongest oaths that if you order them , they would go forth . say : 'do not swear ; honourable obedience is known . allah is well aware of what you do '
this day , on account of wisdom , on account of wisdom has been made clear to you , and what is with it . what is revealed to you is the truth , and they say , ‘ it is only the ancients ’ ;
say , do you dispute with us about god , when he is our lord and your lord ? we have our actions and you have your actions . we are sincere to him .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it . he said , “ did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers ? you have done something awful . ”
that is for the heavens and the earth , so that it may be the power of the lord of the heavens and the earth , that i may speak to the words of moses , even though i am a clear doer of the pharaoh .
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of an omnipotent king .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : you have tarried according to the decree of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know .
and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
and when they will contend one with another in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
are they waiting for god to come to them in the shadows of the clouds with the angels , and the matter is settled ? all things are returned to god .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
and it is he who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills and rivers ; and of every fruit he placed therein two kinds ; he covereth the night with the day ; surely in this are signs for people who ponder .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or as you have averred .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
throw down your staff . when he saw it writhing as if it were a snake , he turned in flight and did not return . o moses , approach and fear not ; surely you are of the secure .
we sent a shower of stones upon them , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
but the disbelievers rejected , and we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark . then how was the end of those who have been warned ?
those who reject the book and thewith which we sent our messengers ; but they will soon come to know .
thus they were overcome and made to look abiect .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
then they hung their heads. ‘ you certainly know that they can not speak . ’
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who fabricateth a lie against allah , or saith : i am unto you a revelation revealed unto me , and he who cries lies to the truth , and who said : bring unto me the book as allah hath revealed : and if the wrong-doers be , then declare unto allah a thing , and be stiff-necked .
o you who have wrapped up in your garments !
lo ! those who dispute with us concerning the revelations , they dispute about allah 's revelations . they are not the ones to argue on account of it . they are the ones who take heed for themselves . so allah is the hearer , the seer .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance among us , we would have been guided by the right course ; therefore i shall keep it on account of the qur ’ an , so that it is we who are the giver . ”
so our lord ’ s word became due against us that we will surely taste .
as a provision for human beings ; and with it we revive a dead country . likewise will be the rising .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
o people who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
he will say , ‘ by allah , you had almost ruined me !
indeed hell is in ambush ,
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but in accordance with the lawbefore we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
as for ad , they were arrogant in the land without right , and they said : who is mightier than us in strength ? did they not see that allah who created them was mightier than them in power ? and they used to deny our signs .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
so when our command came , we turnedupside down , and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay , layer on layer ,
they say : if we return to al-madinah , the mighty will surely expel therefrom the meaner . but honour belongs to allah and his apostle and to the believers , but the hypocrites know not .
we mislead you and we ourselves had also gone astray .
said moosa , “ o haroon – what prevented you when you saw them going astray ? ”
the like of which were not created in the land ?
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
they will not hear its hissing , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
say : if the home of the hereafter with allah is for you alone , and not for other people , then long for death if you are truthful .
lost are those who slay their children foolishly without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have certainly gone astray and are not guided .
i will cast him into hell-fire
to solomon , he told his people , the course of sunrise will also be stilled . some of them will be stilled . some of them will also be called to account for the torment of hell .
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
await they aught but that the angels should come unto them or thy lord 's command should come ? thus did those before them . allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
and there will be passed around them vessels of silver and goblets of crystal ,
tell my servants who believe to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there is neither trading nor friendship .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and theright on the high-road .
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
upon them is a padlocked fire .
then he followed a road
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
and most of them believe not in allah except while they associate others with him .
say , “ are you more likely to be superior to the two gardens , while they are so likely ? therefore , we will be severely struck for you . so you will be seized by our punishment ; you are watching and waiting . ”
until , when death comes to one of them , he says , “ my lord , send me back .
and hell is there for all to see ,
jonah too was one of the envoys ;
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
as for those who strive in our cause , we will surely guide them to our ways . god is with the doers of good .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
he replied , god forbid that we should take anyone except him with whom we found our property . indeed , we would be unjust .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
they said : o lot ! verily , we have been sent to the angels . of the lord of mercy , they will not be able to say : it is only for us to follow the command of your lord . so will you not , then , be near .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
the devils did not bring it down .
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men and women who cry out to the weak , saying , “ our lord , we delivered us from this town , and bring a guardian from us ? ”
and those who believe and do good deeds , we shall admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; therein for them shall be spouses purified , and we shall admit them to deepening shade .
o ye wives of the scripture ! be thou patient at the similitude of the stars , the similitude of the like of which is the best ; and establish regular prayer , and establish regular prayer . lo ! allah is only aware of the worlds .
the word of some of their wives are made to go on their people by their foreheads , spouses , and women . some of them will be greeted by their own words . if they were to leave their property , they would have no one to be blamed . god is majestic and all-wise .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord , before the punishment comes upon you suddenly , while you are unaware .
there is no one comparable to him .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
the clatterer !
say , ‘ who is a fool between the two , who has been given to you the sound of the prophet ? ’ who is the best of the polytheists , who has been given clear verses in the hereafter ? and it is in the hereafter that we explain our verses to a people who know .
and by the night when it withdraws ,
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
and if this is in the scripture on the earth , you would not be obedient to the land , but it will be fixed , and the day on which the command will be cut open , and the command on that day will be made clear for the people of this book .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
and if they call thee a liar , messengerswere denied before thee . and unto allah are returned all affairs .
verily , youare going to taste the painful torment ,
in fact , the hour of doom is the time for them to suffer . the suffering of this hour is the most calamitous and the most bitter .
what they concealed before hasappeared to them . and even if they were returned , they would return to what they were forbidden , and they are liars .
and we turned it upside down , and rained on them stones of baked clay .
they solemnly swear that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any other nation . but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
have you raised its tree , or we have raised it ?
so do they wait for aught but the like of the days of those who passed away before them ? say : wait then ; i too am waiting with you .
by thosethat pluck out the soul from depths ,
prostrate yourselves before allah , and serve him .
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
had the truth followed their desires , the heavens and the earth and all those in them would have been depraved . in fact , we have brought them their reminder , but they turned away from their reminder .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears might remember it .
so today no ransom will be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved . your home is the fire . it is your companion—what an evil fate !
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and all of you will remain in it .
but if you can not do it , and you can never do it , then fear the firewhose fuel is men and stones , prepared for the unbelievers .
gardens and fountains ,
and they went early in determination , able .
so destroyed were the thamud by a storm of thunder and lightning .
on the day when the shin will be exposed , and they will be called to prostrate themselves , they will be unable .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
: we feed you only for the sake of allah . we desire no reward from you , nor thanks .
in it the angels and the spirit descend , by the leave of their lord , with every command .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain for you thereby , and subjected for you the ships in order to sail through the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
the day when a friend will not avail a friend in any way , nor will they be helped ,
said joseph , i will give you its interpretation before the food you are served . this knowledge is one of the things my lord has taught me . i have given up the religion of those who do not believe in god and the life to come .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against it ; then to your lord you will be returned .
what will those who invent lies about god think of the day of judgment ? god is bountiful to men ; but most of them are not grateful .
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
and that man shall have nothing but what he strives for-
in the life to come , they will certainly be the losers .
and we made solomon to understand it , and to each of them we gave hukmanand knowledge . and we subjected the mountains and the birds to celebrate our praises along with dawud , and we were the doers .
who say , our lord , save us from the torment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
he is allah , than whom there is no other god : the knower of the unseen and the seen ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
and then , to say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the heavens and the earth ” ; so let the people of israel say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the worlds , so send us down from the guidance of your lord . ”
for those who call the call of their lord , they shall have a happy place of bliss and a place of bliss . if only , the earth is true , they will be the ones who have taken their trust in the earth . it is they who are the worst to take account .
and those who give what they give , their hearts quaking that they are returning to their lord --
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
he is the first and the last , the outward and the inward , and he is the all-knower of everything .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded whoever is in the heavens and the earth will be terrified , except those whom allah wills . all shall come to him humbled .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
so , he who has received the religion of god , and has mercy on you , will say , “ o my sons , you have received a sound of it . god has decided to keep you out of it , and be devoted to the other . god has decided to be a matter in your stead , when you have received a true pledge .
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
and if there be a party of them that said to allah , “ follow what is hidden for us , ” say , “ show me your offspring , and we are your women , and we are the outcast . ”
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
and they will say , “ praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit this land , so that we may dwell in paradise wherever we will . how excellent is the reward of the workers ! ”
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation . he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
and if we have mercy on them and remove the affliction that is upon them , they would still persist in their insolence wandering blindly .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you harbored doubts about allah .
say : is thatbetter or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is their recompense and their destination .
as such we established joseph in the land to live wherever he liked . we bestow our mercy on whom we please , and we do not waste the reward of the righteous .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
the fire of allah , kindled ,
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in six days ; then allah makes the throne a matter to be established , and it is the same for him to have no protector or friend .
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
his wife and his brother ,
proclaim , “ what is the matter with you , that you may eat from it , and what is written to you ? ” proclaim , “ what is the matter with you , if you are wary of allah ? indeed allah is quick to account . ”
and abraham , who is in his custody of him , when he said to his people , “ o dear prophetwhen you are about to see , ” and when he said to his people , “ o my lord ! indeed , you have made us worship , and the other than allah ; and the command of abraham said to him , “ o lord , you have brought us the truth , and it is towards you that you will be devoted . ”
so when he came to solomon , he said , “ are you helping me with wealth ? what god has given me is better than what he has given you ; rather it is you who rejoice in your gift . ”
the knower of the invisible and the visible , the exalted , the praised .
and if those who are unjust are the ones who are the earth , then it is only for the sake of allah to be on the day of resurrection ; and what they do , on the day of resurrection , they will be the giver of punishment from allah , and the punishment of the burning fire .
they said , “ what is the matter with the noble messengers , so what is your opinion regarding the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is it the creator of the heavens and the earth ? what is it that you do not have the like of this , and he will forgive you the like for a time ?
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is sickness said , “ their religion has deluded these people. ” but whoever puts his trust in god—god is mighty and wise .
and nothing prevented people from believing when the guidance came to them , except that they said : has allah sent a human being as a messenger ?
saying : we believe in the lord of the worlds , -
and they sold him for a cheap price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value .
then god caused his tranquillity to descend upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers ; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
and the trumpet will be blown , that will be the day whereof warning .
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there will be no escape for them .
but it is only a trial , and the blood that allah has made a proclamation upon you . so it is true . he has made no way to be blamed . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
they said : do you wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house . indeed , he is praiseworthy , all-glorious .
it is not lawful for theewomen after this , nor to change them for other wives even though their beauty please you , except those whom your right hand possesses . allah is watchful over all things .
say , “ i fear , if i disobey my lord , the punishment of a tremendous day . ”
kaf , ha , ya , 'ayn , sad .
if they turn awaygod knows well the evil-doers .
and allah will vindicate the truth by his words , however much the mujrimunmay hate it .
no indeed ; surely man waxes insolent ,
surely , they have said , god is the most merciful . tell them , god has only given the preference to his son . say , if god does the same son of mary , his son will also have the son of mary . he has the power to do all that is in the heavens and the earth . he has power over all things .
indeed , i have shown the birth of a boy to whom he pleases , and bestowed on him the dominion of the sun and the moon . indeed , he is the master of the sun and the moon , so he guided them to a straight path .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
that which they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
who say , our lord , save us from the torment of hell , for its punishment is a terrible punishment .
had allah willed , they would not have associated others with him in his divinity ; and we have not made you a watcher over them , nor are you their pleader .
those who believed in our signs , and were muslims .
the unbelievers say , ‘ this is nothing but a lie that he has fabricated , and others have helped him at it. ’ so they have committed injustice and falsehood .
and on the day when we set the mountains in motion and you see the earth emerging , and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
butrejected it and disobeyed ;
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these are the companions of the name .
in the morning he was in the city , fearful and vigilant , when the man who had sought his help the day before called out to him . moses said to him , 'clearly thou art , a quarreller . '
and to him shall return all of you , and allah 's is the promise of allah ; and allah 's is the promise of allah ; and for him is the promise of allah ; and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
is not allah sufficient for his servant ? and they frighten you with thoseother than him . and whoever allah leaves astray - for him there is no guide .
so that we may guide the people to the right way , and that the promise of allah is true . and that the promise of allah is true , and the hour is sure to come . they said , ‘ we have indeed been present as to what they did . ’
and they say , “ our hearts are sealed. ” rather , allah has cursed them for their unbelief ; so few of them have faith .
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
verily we have sent thee with the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
moses prayed , lord , forgive me and my brother and admit us to your mercy , for you are most merciful of the merciful .
gardens and fountains ,
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently stay with me ? ”
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
when the messengers came to the family of lot ,
say : 'my lord outspreads and withholds his provision to whomsoever he will of his worshipers . whatsoever you expend he will replace it . he is the best of providers '
when moses said to his family : i perceive a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
verily we ! we established him in the earth , and vouchsafed unto him of everything a way .
and allah 's is the like of it ; so he made the earth to be barren with him on the day of resurrection . and they were glorified by the command of allah on the day of resurrection . exalted is he , above all that they associate with him !
do you not see that allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth , and the birds with wings outspread ? he knows the prayer and the glorification , and allah knows best what they do .
he said : what is your errand , sent ones ?
allah chooses messengers from angels and from mankind . indeed allah is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and that which she used to worship besides allah has prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
on that day all sovereignty will belong to god . he will judge between them . those who believe and do good deeds will be in gardens of bliss .
god will not forgive those who deny the truth and act wrongfully , nor will he guide them to any way .
let not the vicissitudeof those who disbelieve , in the land , deceive thee .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
god has decreed : i will surely prevail , i and my messengers ; surely god is powerful and mighty .
then we raised the children of israel through the sea , and they came to a people who were devoted to their gods . they said : o moses , make us a pattern , like those of the idol-worshippers . you are ignorant , he replied .
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah , son of mary , son of mary ! say , ‘ o children of israel ! allah has indeed taken to himself a son , and he is the lord of , and the fire . then the fire is not for him . ’
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
the one who created the creation of your own creation , is the nature of the night . it has been revealed by the night . there is in it a different way . it has been revealed by the heavens and the earth , in which there is a lesson for them .
why do the rabbis and religious scholars not forbid them from saying what is sinful and devouring what is unlawful ? evil is what they have been doing .
then fir'awn sent unto the cities callers :
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
do not be like those who forgot god , so he made them forget their own souls . it is they who are the sinners .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
we will certainly make clear to you clear signs , clear signs . the measuring of his people is the just . so make clear to the people of the book , in order to make clear to the people . god is majestic and all-merciful .
were allah to hasten the ill for mankind as they hasten for the good , their term would have been finished . so we leave those who do not expect to meet us , to wander in their rebellion .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
then lot believed in him , and said , “ i am emigrating to my lord . he is the noble , the wise . ”
from which you are turning away .
and when there came to them a messenger from allah , confirming what was with them , a party of those who were given the book threw the book of allah behind their backs as if they did not know .
bending his side , in order to leadastray from the path of allah . for him there is disgrace in this world , and on the day of resurrection we shall make him taste the penalty of burning .
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these are the companions of the name .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of the fire and they shall remain in it .
no indeed ! we created them from what they know .
besides allah ? they will say : they have failed us . in fact , we used not to call upon anything before . thus does allah send astray the disbelievers .
youwe worship , and youwe ask for help .
the way is only against those who ask leave of youthough they are rich . they are content to be with those who stay behind . allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not know .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
nay , but those who disbelieve are in false pride and schism .
bring them back to me ; and he began caressing their shins and necks .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and when we made a covenant with moosa , do not worship any one with his parents and the good , and the good , and the virtuous , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , and the prayer , but they are disregardful .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet a party , be firm , and remember allah much , that haply ye may fare well .
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of god , if you believe in god and the last day . let their punishment be witnessed by a party of believers .
thus have we sent it down as an arabic quran , and have explained therein in detail the warnings , in order that they may fear allah , or that it may cause them to keep a remembrance .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whom he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , then all that they used to do would have gone to waste .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
“ as for my servants , you have no authority over them. ” your lord is a sufficient protector .
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book and thereafter we sent unto musa , and afterward sent down unto musa the signs and a manifest argument . what , then , when we have sent unto thee a revelation of the evidences , is then the followers of the stiff-necked .
and the hypocrites will call unto the believers , and we have not been vouchsafed unto you . but they will say : yea , for ye have been sent by . therefor fear allah , and hath taken them away . and the satan hath gone astray , and he hath barred them from a thing .
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the unbelievers plotted against you to take you captive , or kill you , or expel you . they plotted and god was devising . god is the best of planners .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
except those of the idolaters with whom you have made a treaty , and who have not failed you in aught , nor have supported anyone against you . so fulfill their treaty to them till their term . indeed allah loves the righteous .
and of some of the wealth are those who are given the property of their hearts , that they shall be made to drink of their houses , and if there be for them a thing of their deeds , my remembrance is indeed ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
the indubitable !
melting their insides and their skins .
indeed , we will help our messengers and those who believe in the life of this world and on the day when the witnesses will stand forth , -
then he frowned and scowled ,
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
and those who believe and do good deeds will be admitted to gardens beneath which rivers flow , wherein they will abide for ever . they have a promise of allah , so that is a true promise .
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
and we saved those who believed and were pious .
respond to your lord before there comes a day from god that can not be turned back . you will have no refuge on that day , and no possibility of denial .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
the two groups of the two groups were also shown to you , some of the other people for the cause of god . some of them have the faith in the way of god . some of them do so for their own good . god does not want to take the hearts of those who are uncertain .
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
and be moderatein your walking , and lower your voice . verily , the harshest of all voices is the voiceof the ass .
say : enough is allah for a witness between me and you . verily ! he is the all-knower , the all-seer of his slaves .
they will say : glory be to thee ! no one can be sent to us except thou , or the one , or the other one , or the other
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne ; then he repented .
and abraham , who paid his debt in full ?
and acacia covered with heaps of bloom ,
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he provides for whomever he wishes , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
do you not see that the ships sail in the sea by the favor of allah that he may show you some of his signs ? verily , in this are signs for every patient , grateful person .
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
say : 'people of the book , why do you bar the faithful from the way of allah , seeking to make it crooked , while you are witnesses ? allah is not unaware of what you do '
and his wealth will not avail him when he perishes .
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , jesus and job , and jonah and aaron and solomon , and we gave to david psalms ,
o people of the book ! say to the people of the book , ‘ we have been sent to a herald of glad tidings , so that the warner may be shown to them . allah has power over all things . ’
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
has therecome upon man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
say : verily , my lord is the all knowing of what is said and what is manifest to him . so what is the matter with the words of allah , which has been revealed to him ? for he has made of you a book of pure things .
and they say : the beneficent allah has takena son .
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the resting place .
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner . every people has its guide .
and those who say : our lord ! bestow on us wives and offspring who will be the comfort of our eyes , and make us leaders for the righteous .
allah effaces and confirms whatever he wishes and with him is the mother book .
some of them believed in it and some held back from it . hell suffices for a blaze .
so today no soul will be wronged in the least , and you will not be recompensed except for what you used to do .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in the former and in the latter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
at daybreak they called out to one another :
and how can i worship , other than allah , that ye worship as partners that which allah hath sent down unto thee ? then , of that which ye have been sent , - behold ! - if ye think ye know !
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
and when he did not make the opponents to come into his presence , they said , “ did you not consider that your father has been dropped with him ? ” so he made them quit of that our promise ; and he is the best of judges .
and olives and date-palms ,
when you see those who plungeinto our verses , turn away from them until they engage in some other talk . if satan causes you to forget , do not sit after the recollection with the unjust people .
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished . lo ! falsehood is ever bound to vanish .
throw down what is in your right hand . it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trickery . a magician will never succeed , wherever he may come .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kindness .
, o jesus , son of mary , remember me , my son , when i am a messenger of the faithful , when i am a the messenger of the faithful , when i have spoken to them by the means of the faithful , when i have been in the matter of the people of the bookand the injeel , when the torah and the gospel are recorded at the end of the law . this is the right course .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
the pharaoh said : ' o people , i have no part of that of which the name of god is . ' i have been commanded to say the words of god , be patient , and say to them , ' i have been commanded to speak with a new word . '
to him you attend ;
they said : your evil augury be with you . what ! if ye are admonished ! nay , but ye are froward folk !
the knower of the unseen , and he does not disclose his invisible to anyone
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
and to allah only belongs all whatever is in the heavens and all whatever is in the earth ; and indeed , we have directed to you the way of allah before you , and fear allah ; and allah is the absolute , the owner of all praise .
no word can be given to you a share of the quran . it is no laws of revelation , which is revealed to us . it is in our power that they will be reminded of it , or in the heavens or in the sky a great share .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah – it may be that they will be among the guided .
say , “ i am commanded to serve god , devoting my religion exclusively to him .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
we have given this discourse to the people of understanding . is there anyone who pointed to the same way ? one who pointed to the law of this book was rightly guided .
and good is unto thee in the world to come ; we have surely guided them unto thee , and the ways of doom will be said unto thee : my doom will be a temptation unto thee ; and anon i shall make unto thee the hire of the god-fearing .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we shall never believe in you .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third . they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
by the mount ;
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a spring of murky water and near it he found a people . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you may punish them or treat them with kindness .
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it . and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds .
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
they are the ones who give the lie to the true ones who have broken their duty to the path of god , as their means of duty to them , so they will not have any share of it . god will cause them to suffer a painful torment .
say , “ you are about to speak upon the word , or recite it to them . the words of god is too proper to you ; therefore , ask the people of the remembrance , in which is the law of the qur ’ an ; so ask them for a beneficial tone .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
o you who have faith ! do not take your opinions in place of your own , and do not follow in your religion a thing . indeed , it is the thing for you to commit evil , and evil is the result of their deeds .
so give a respite to the unbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
until , when he reached the setting of the sun , he found it setting in a spring of murky water and near it he found a people . we said , dhu ' l-qarnayn ! you may punish them or treat them with kindness .
the pious ones will rest amid the shade , springs ,
the knowledge of the torah he said , i will bring it to you . he said : i will bring it to him . then he said : 'is it the gift of my lord ? ' he said , ‘ is it a clear grace for him ? ’ and whoever is in truth , then indeed , my lord is the most praiseworthy , the most praiseworthy .
had we sent down to you a book on paper so they could touch it with their hands , the unbelievers would have said , this is nothing but clear magic .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
verily i am allah . there is no allah save me . so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
if you follow the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and conjecture .
then i called them openly ,
so remind , . you are only a reminder .
have you not seen that allah has full knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? there is no partnership in the case of allah , the rising of each other 's . there is no changer of worship except him . it is only he who has knowledge of what they have earned ; and he is the most disputatious of all things .
seek help in patience and prayer ; and truly it is hard save for the humble-minded ,
and he overthrew the subverted cities
and whenever a sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , they turn away from it .
can youmake the deaf hear ? or guide the blind and him who is in manifest error ?
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
and i know not ; perhaps it may be a trial for you and an enjoyment for a while .
it is only for the people of the subverted scripture that they will be before the messenger of allah . there is no fault in the people of the past , but it is a confirmation of the truth . it is not a fitting reward for the disbelievers .
they will abide therein , their punishment will neither be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , and oppose the messenger after guidance has become clear to them , they will not hurt allah in the least , and he will make their works fruitless .
and paradise will be brought near for the righteous .
allah , to whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and woe to the disbelievers from a severe punishment .
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
miserable is what they sold their souls for—rejecting what god has sent down , out of resentment that god would send down his grace upon whomever he chooses from his servants . there is a demeaning punishment for the disbelievers .
theirs will be a bed of hell , and over them coverings . thus do we requite wrong-doers .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs the enduring religion . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
and your lord proclaimed , “ pray to me , i will respond to you ; but those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
they were among our believing servants .
it is only for the people of the subverted scripture that they will be before the messenger of allah . there is no fault in the people of the past , but it is a confirmation of the truth . it is not a fitting reward for the disbelievers .
and if any of the polytheists seeks your protection , then grant him protection so that he may hear the word of allah , and then convey him to his place of safety . that is because they are a people who do not know .
and they say , “ we have accepted faith in allah and his noble messenger , and we obey ” ; then a group of them turns away after this ; and they are not muslims .
when the most unfortunate of them broke forth with
never did we destroy a population , but had its warners -
surely their lord will be aware of their .
it is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
the example of those who disbelieve in their lord is that their works are as ashes , on which the wind blows furiously on a stormy day ; they have no control over aught that they have earned . that is the extreme failure .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
say , “ it is the punishment for you . so keep aside from it , and do not follow the sound of them , but when you are worthy to be pure – so when they are worthy to accept it , god does not accept the right path . ”
thou art but a mortal like us . so bring a sign if thou art of the truth-tellers .
the word is not changed with me ; i wrong not my servants . '
and to that fact he bears witness ;
it is he who has subjected the sea for you to eat from it tender meat , and obtain from it ornaments which you wear , and you see the ships plowing through it , that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
he said , “ i will not bring you any expert , until you solemnly promise him to return to me , except for the promise of him ; and when they swore to me , he said , “ god is the witness of what we have said . ”
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
in the neighbouring land . but they , after their defeat , will overcome .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
so eat of the lawful and good food which allah has provided for you , and be grateful for the graces of allah , if it is him that you worship .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
reclining therein on raised couches , they will see there neither the sun'snorexcessive cold .
they ask you , when will the hour of doom come ? tell them : the knowledge of the hour is only with my lord , and when the hour has come , it is only to my lord that the hour is coming . but most of them will not be able to say .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
and we made his offspring the survivors .
o mankind ! eat of what is lawful and good on the earth , and follow not the footsteps of the devil ; surely he is your open enemy .
god will seek the protection of those who believe and seek the light light in the light and the light . those who deny the truth will face the light of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
with the help of allah . he succoureth whomsoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
they will not taste therein cool or any drink .
how many a town have we destroyed ! our might came upon it at night , or while they were napping .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find no protector for you .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
or is the unseen in their keeping , and so they are writing it down ?
the unbelievers claim that they will never be raised up again . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did ; and that is easy for allah .
if they had followed the right path , we would have given them abundant rain
such are the people against whom the word has proved true among nations of the jinn and the men that have passed away before them . they will belost .
and said : 'are we to renounce our gods for the sake of a mad poet '
those who fear their lord in the unseen , tremble because of the hour .
and she who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and made her and her son a sign for the nations .
so he cast his staff , and behold , it was a serpent manifest .
but those who seek more than this will be transgressors ;
and whoever does allah , then guide his guidance , and whoever follows the right way – so you will not find any one except him ; and the fire is their destination . and the fire is their destination .
but my call added only to their flight .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
indeed , to your lord is the return .
and say , ‘ do what you do , allah will see your deeds and his messenger and the believers , and you will be returned to the knower of the sensible and the unseen , and he will inform you of what you used to do . ’
then their cry , when our punishment came to them , was only that they said , “ we were indeed wrongdoers . ”
but the shout seized them in the morning ,
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
it is he who has made the book a roof , and we shall make it as a means of wide expanse for it . what is the matter with you , that you shall be made to hear in it . what is the matter with the hearts of the day of judgment , and how god does not love the sinful ones .
they have rejected the truth when it came to them , but there will come to them news of that they were mocking .
say , perhaps some of the things which you wish to experience immediately are close to you .
and no friend will ask about his friend ,
in parchment unrolled .
and they ask you about the book , and say , “ the course of better is better than this ; and if you speak the truth , it is the same ; and if allah please , he is the wise , the wise . ”
and when they will contend one with another in the fire , the weak will say to those who were arrogant , “ we were your followers ; will you then spare us a portion of the fire ? ”
we gave moses the book , and made it a guide for the children of israel : take not other than me as disposer ofaffairs .
moses said to them , woe to you ! do not invent lies against god , lest he destroy you by some punishment . whoever invents lies has failed .
so put your trust in allah , for you are on the clear truth .
and say : truth hasarrived , and falsehood perished . lo ! falsehood is ever bound to vanish .
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
give tidings of painful punishment to the hypocrites .
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden from , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
but those who disbelieved and denied our signs - those are the companions of the fire , to remain in it forever ; and what a wretched outcome !
how can there be for the associators a covenant with allah , and his messenger , except those with whom you covenanted ? then as long as they are honest with you , take the right path with them . allah loves the righteous .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise a cloud , then we drive it towards a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise is the resurrection .
and have protected it from every rebellious satan .
the heavens are almost torn , and the earth is split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they had ridiculed .
if only the people of the book had believed and feared allah , we would surely have blotted out their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
and sown fields , fine sitting places ,
then we raised the children of israel through the sea , and they came to a people who were devoted to their gods . they said : o moses , make us a pattern , like those of the idol-worshippers . you are ignorant , he replied .
he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death . likewise you will be resurrected .
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude -- for we knew him --
so , as for the exhorting of the children of israel , to make no excuses on the children of israel , those who have forgotten the matter of the children of israel , is as the one who does not want to be saved or spread the sins of the life to come . this is the greatest act .
and verily thy lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
he is the true one . finally , the book has been revealed at the price of wisdom . in truth , the words of wisdom will be revealed to them . god 's revelations are the people who have no faith in the revelations of god .
when they came to their own , they begin to understand it , or have the right word in them . let them be a pair of their own laws , without the permission of god . he who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds . anyone who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds .
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
to allah belong both the next world and the present .
and whoever shuns the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , to be his companion .
most surely it is the word of a noble messenger ,
we shall save your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . many people are heedless of our signs .
we never heard of this in the former faith ; this is nothing but a forgery :
the word of your lord is perfected in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
so allah seized himan example for the afterand for the former .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleep as a rest , and he made the day a revival .
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from himself and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
god made it but a message of hope for you , and to reassure your hearts thereby . victory comes only from god the all-mighty , the all-wise .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and fulfillcommitment . indeed , the covenant will be asked about .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . he answered , god says she should be neither too old nor too old , but in between , so do as you are commanded .
so that we may glorify you much
who creates , then makes complete ,
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
so woe to those that pray
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , those are they who are the losers '
is it the laws of wisdom , the true one , the one who believes in god and the last day , which is true , and is not equal to god ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and when it is recited to them , they say , “ we believe in it . it is the truth from our lord . we were muslims prior to it . ”
in an assembly of truth , in the presence of an omnipotent king .
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
by the lote-tree of the utmost boundary ,
and verily we have coined for mankind in this qur'an all kinds of similitudes , that haply they may reflect .
so give a respite to the unbelievers . deal thou gently with them for a while .
do not envy the favors which allah has granted to some of you . to the men a share from what they have earned , and to the women a share from what they have earned . and ask allah for his munificence . indeed allah knows all things .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or grants to whomever he wills .
say : i know not whether thewhich ye are promised is near , or whether my lord will appoint for it a distant term .
and thou wast not on the side of the mount when we called ; buta mercy from thy lord , that thou mayest warn a people unto whom no warner came before thee , that haply they may be admonished .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
but god will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
'put him in a wooden box and cast it in the river . the river will cast it on the bank . an enemy and an enemy of ours will retrieve it .
no indeed ; but you love the hasty world ,
and the mountains stakes ?
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
say thou : i have no power of revelation that i have been revealed unto me , nor is it unto him who hath been delivered unto him . he who is a defrauder , will not be able to say , it is only the word of a soothsayer , or a whisper . lo ! thy lord is ever forgiving , the lord of mercy .
is not he able to give life to the dead ?
praise be to god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the wise , the aware .
except the observers of prayer -
as for the unbelievers , i will chastise them with a terrible chastisement in this world and the next , and they shall have no helpers . '
the heaven will shatter thereby . his promise is always fulfilled .
'taste ! we shall not increase you except in punishment '
which guides to the right path . we believe in it and we will not associate anyone with our lord .
so worship none but allah , and you do not worship any one but allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . indeed , it is not for the people who are oblivious of the truth .
and we gave the children of israel the book , and pharaoh and his hosts , and he came unto them with hosts that she might be of the believers . he said : there is no god but allah , the lord of the worlds .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
if we will , we can send down upon them a sign from the sky so that their necks would remain bowed before it .
the companions of paradise on that day will be better lodged , and more fairly accommodated .
indeed , we sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray , goes astray to his own detriment , and you are not their overseer .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish save his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . he pardons much .
then he was swallowed by a large fish as he was worthy of blame .
then musathrew his stick , and behold , it swallowed up all the falsehoods which they showed !
he will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens with streams running in them , to lodge in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
then went he to his folk with glee .
and olives and date-palms ,
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah better , or that which they associate ?
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
otherwise , if disaster should afflict them because of that which their own hands have sent before , they should say : our lord ! why didst thou not send a messenger to us that we might have followed thy signs and been of the believers ?
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and we left for him among the posterity :
your lord , he is the almighty , the most merciful .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
for the day of judgement .
god has the right of his good deeds . do away with what they have done . this is the result of their deeds . god does not love the evil-doers .
a guide and a reminder for men of understanding .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
a guidance and good news for the believers
so , when the unbelievers , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will be driven to them , so that when they were to be reminded by it , the companions of the pharaoh will be struck by the like of them , so they would not have done the like of it , or the people of pharaoh . they will never be punished .
and we are they who exalt '
and the shade of black smoke ,
the fire of allah , kindled ,
is he who walks grovelling upon his face better guided , or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
it is just as the end of the believers that you should see , as you are in it . god does not reveal the issue of the people until the hearts of those who are willing to believe in god . have faith in god , the messengers and the messengers . but if you believe in god , the messengers will have everlasting reward .
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
until the day of the time appointed . ”
and messengers we have mentioned to you before , and messengers we have not mentioned to you , and to musaallah spoke directly .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
they will say : nay ! you ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
they said : shall we believe in thee when the meanest follow thee ?
they descend on every lying , wicked person ,
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
'there is nothing but our first death , we shall not be revived .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . he is the most high , the most great .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouteth unto that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
and they used to say , “ when we are dead and turned into dust and bones , are we to be resurrected ?
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
the word is near at hand , or whether you should be a part of them , is a sentence . so hold no attention to them . it is sound . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
faces on that day will be joyful .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
they said , never will we prefer you over the clear signs that have come to us , and to himwho created us . so decree whatever you will . you can only decree for your worldly life .
surely they are in doubt concerning the meeting with their lord ; pay heed ! he encompasses everything .
hallowed be he who hath created all the pairs of that which the earth groweth , and of themselves and of that which they know not .
and as for those who are lawless , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to come forth from it , they shall be driven back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
then , when they forgot what they had been reminded of , we delivered those who forbade evil , and seized the unjust with a terrible punishment because of their disobedience .
it will be but one shout , lo ! they will be staring .
besides allah ? they will say : they have failed us . in fact , we used not to call upon anything before . thus does allah send astray the disbelievers .
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
and we left for him among the posterity :
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
except the family of lot whom we shall save
this is the command of god which he has revealed to you . god will expiate the evil deeds of those who fear him and will increase their rewards .
so allah gave them the reward of the world and the good reward of the hereafter . allah loves those who do good .
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and we have created for them the like of it in which they board .
except your sincere servants .
he said , o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not seek forgiveness of allah so that you may receive mercy ?
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and extend against you their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
enter it in peace . this is the day of eternity .
if you raise your hand to kill me , i will not raise my hand to kill you , for i fear allah , the lord of the worlds .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
verily these ! they say :
an insight and a reminder for every bondman penitent .
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
verily ! you are of us ever a well-seer .
these will be given their reward twice over because they are steadfast , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have given them .
then his wife came forward crying . she beat her face , and said , “ a barren old woman ! ”
so he resolved to turn them out of the land , but we drowned him and all his followers .
and what they used to earn did not avail them .
but those who fear their lord , for them are lofty halls with lofty halls above them , built , beneath which rivers flow.the promise of allah . allah does not fail inpromise .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
on the day when the hour sets in , the guilty will swear that they did not tarry but an hour : thus were they perverted .
jonah too was one of the envoys ;
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
leave mewith the deniers , the opulent , and give them a little respite .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those who were before you , so that you may be godwary .
they will live therein forever . what an excellent abode and place of stay .
the most beneficentistawathethrone .
and fair maidens with large , lustrous eyes
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
there will be sent against you both , smokeless flames of fire andbrass , and you will not be able to defend yourselves .
they said : o lot ! verily , we have been sent to the angels . of the lord of mercy , they will not be able to say : it is only for us to follow the command of your lord . so will you not , then , be near .
those who commit unlawful sexual intercourse from among your women , take the evidence of four witnesses against them ; and if they testify , confine them to the homes until death takes them away or allah ordains for them someway .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we promise them .
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
but if justice is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and on the day when we gather them all together , then say to the polytheists , “ where are those partnerswhom you professed ? ”
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , in the land , or in the evening , or are ye not of those who are going to be able to say : 'would that we could not be sent back to the way of allah , and allah is seer of what ye do .
but as for those who disbelieved : were not our verses recited to you ? but you were arrogant and became a guilty people .
then they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
save him who bringeth unto allah a whole heart .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
none of those whom they ascribed as partnerswill intercede for them , and they will reject their partners .
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
he will say : thus did our signs come to you and you forgot them . so will you be ignored this day .
if it were the truth we shall bring forth for them a term until a term appointed , say : what is the matter with it that the day of judgment will be ? it will be a day whereon they will be called out .
seize him and drag him into the midst of hell ,
that is because they say , the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days . and the false beliefs which they have fabricated have deluded them in their religion .
we gave the children of israel the book , judgment and prophethood . we provided them with good things and preferred them above the worlds .
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things god has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
round about them shall go youths never altering in age ,
to allah belong the armies of the heavens and the earth . allah is the almighty , the wise .
and by those who glide along ,
we also favored moses and aaron
and when the punishment descended upon them , they said : o moses ! pray to your lord for us by the covenant he has made with you . if you lift the plague from us , we will certainly believe in you and let the children of israel go with you .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
and when they entered unto him , they said : o aziz ! distress hath touched us and our household , and we have brought scanty money , so give us full measure and be charitable unto us . lo ! allah recompenseth the charitable .
and had we not given thee strength , thou hadst well-nigh leaned toward them a little .
enjoin ye righteousness upon mankind , and forgetyourselves , and yet ye study the scripture ? have ye no sense ?
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
when the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ what answer did you give to the noble messengers ? ”
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
those they invoke themselves seek the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear him .
if any of the boys were arrogant , he is not a servant of his own ; but if they are a righteous , it is only for a good deed ; and if they are righteous , it is only a few that will be righteous .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
you do not take revenge on us except because we believed in the signs of our lord when they came to us . our lord , pour patience upon us and let us die as muslims .
and among men there is such a one that disputes concerning allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil ,
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
and that is for allah not difficult .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that it is a source of wine for you to drink . this is the law of the truth , and the matter in which a clear law is for the people . this is how god presents the truth for the truth .
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
saying : lo ! when we were with our families , we were ever anxious .
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
did they enjoin this upon one another ? in fact , they are a rebellious people .
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
say : 'have you considered the provision allah has sent down for you , and you have made some of it lawful and some unlawful ? ' say : 'has allah given you leave , or do you forge a lie against allah ? '
we also favored moses and aaron
we have bestowed our favour on you before this
the jews , the christians , not at all , the jews , the christians , will not be able to say . say , it is only with god to show you the truth ; and if you follow the right direction , you will not be able to know .
say : show me those whom ye have joined with him as partners . nay ! for he is allah , the mighty , the wise .
they denied our signs , all of them , so we seized them with the seizing of one mighty , omnipotent .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger , will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
and what shall teach thee what is the night-star ?
so worship none but allah , and you do not worship any one but allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . indeed , it is not for the people who are oblivious of the truth .
give tidings of painful punishment to the hypocrites .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
so fight in the way of allah , you are responsible only for yourself . and rouse the believers . perhaps allah will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
god thus seals the hearts of those who do not know .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything ; you are only in great error . '
satan only desires to precipitate enmity and hatred between you in regard to wine and gambling , and to bar you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer . so will you not desist ?
and fear a day when no soul will compensate for another , nor will compensation be accepted from it , nor will any intercession benefit it , nor will they be helped .
intercession with him will not help , except for him to whom he gives permission . when terror comes from their hearts , they say : what was it that your lord said ? they say : the truth . and he is the most high , the most great .
your lord is the originator of the heavens and the earth , then the throne of the throne and the throne will be concluded . the sun and the moon will be called out by god 's command . the words of god will be the supreme .
these are they who buy the life of this world at the price of the hereafter . their punishment will not be lightened , nor will they be helped .
and if they separate , allah will enrich each of them from his vastness ; and allah is most capable , wise .
verily those who hath a covenant a small price for them , is not the word of allah , on the day of resurrection , and allah approveth not a word , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
o you who believe ! why do you say what you do not do ?
without adding .
and trust thou in the living one who dieth not , and hymn his praise . he sufficeth as knower of his bondmen 's sins .
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
they believe in allah and the last day , and enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and hasten to excel each other in doing good . these are among the righteous .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error by circulating between them . whoever volunteers good—god is appreciative and cognizant .
yet different groups differed among themselves . woe to the unbelievers when they see the terrible day .
nun . by the pen and thewhichwrite , -
then he becomes of those who believe and charge one another to show patience , and charge one another to show compassion .
and i will give them respite . my plan is firm .
the word of the men , to whom belongs the word of god . that is what god has made of their own people , and some of the women to be given a share of their wealth . this is what god has revealed to them . they are the ones who have fear of god .
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have cut out for them garments of fire . boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say : 'bring the torah and recite it , if you are truthful . '
in his place they invoke only females ; and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
and when i am ill , it is he who cures me ;
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
in the gardens of bliss ,
it is he who created you from clay , then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you are still in doubt !
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed evil was that which they used to do .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters in which you differ . fear god , and obey me .
whenever they try to escape the gloom , they will be driven back therein , and taste the punishment of burning .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
and verily there is for you in the cattle a lesson : we give you to drink of that which is in their bellies , from betwixt the dung and the blood , pure milk , refreshing to the drinkers .
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , to bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-compassionate to the believers .
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and in their footsteps , we sent jesus son of mary , fulfilling the torah that preceded him , and we gave him the gospel , confirming what is before it , and scriptures , and a guidance and a reminder to the godfearing .
do you not bring back his soul , if you are truthful ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
and i will turn away from you and from those whom you invoke besides allah . and i will call on my lord ; perhaps i will not be unblessed in calling on my lord .
indeed this , your religion , is one religion , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
if you do not go forth , he will punish you with a painful punishment and replace you by another people , and you will not hurt him in the least , and allah has power over all things .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? rather , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in torment and in far error .
and saved them and their people from the great distress ,
is the one who knows all that is in the hands of their own book ? they have set different groups with god . say , “ bring it upon those who have rejected the truth , and say , “ bring it upon those who are bent on denying the truth . god has the knowledge of the disbelievers . ”
taught man what he did not know .
say : each one acts according to his disposition , but your lord knows best who is best-guided to the right path .
they rejoice in the grace and bounty from allah , and allah does not waste the reward of the faithful .
and the earth which he spread out ,
if we willed , we could show them to you , and you would recognize them by their marks . but you will surely know them by the tone of their speech . god knows all your deeds .
andfaces will be humbled before the ever-living , the sustainer of existence . and he will have failed who carries injustice .
and warn with it those who fear that they will be gathered before their lord , when there will be no protector for them besides him , and that they may guard .
and we raised the mount above them , and they took covenant with them , and we said to them : 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and no one will be paid back except by the leave of allah . and the time for the time of the hereafter is indeed the reward of the hereafter ; and whoever desires the reward of the hereafter , we shall give good news to those who give thanks .
and we brought the others close to that place .
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and whatever is between them , and whatever is under the ground .
and whosoever repenteth and worketh righteously , then verily he repenteth toward allah with a true repentance .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , then remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death ; and allah besieges the faithless .
in fact , the religion of abraham and isaac , does not follow the tradition of abraham , and no one will be able to speak to us . this is the result of god . but many people do not give thanks .
and we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed , so ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
and as for those who are lawless , their abode is the fire . whenever they desire to come forth from it , they shall be driven back into it , and it will be said to them : taste the torment of the fire which you used to deny .
we had no authority over you . no , youwere a rebellious lot .
then thereby raise dust ,
verily i am allah . there is no allah save me . so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
o ye who believe ! be ye disbelievers in allah 's way , as the name of allah : isa son of mary , isa son of mary : ‘ who is it that will be a sign to allah , so that we may be the rejectors of the believers ? then , we have made them a harvestreaped , so that they became a tyrant .
and those who believeand do righteous good deeds , we will surely remove from them their misdeeds and will surely reward them according to the best of what they used to do .
let not their speech grieve you . indeed all honour is allah 's ; he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
then a welcome of inferno .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and allah delivereth those who ward offbecause of their deserts . evil toucheth them not , nor do they grieve .
o my people , how is it that i call you to salvation , and you call me to the fire ?
for the living and the dead ?
you see the mountains and think them firmly fixed , but they will pass away as the passing away of the clouds -- the handiwork of allah who has created everything well . he is aware of the things you do .
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness ;
and he it is who hath created you from the truth , and he createth the word thereof ; so that he may make the wife pass away . and when he causeth the human to be a state of the child , he saith : by allah , thou wilt be a confirmer .
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers .
they ask you about the story of a dispute . tell them : why is it that you are responsible for the people of the remembrance ? it will be said to the believers , this is what you are trying to worship . have fear of god so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness .
o you who have faith ! do not take your women for guardians , instead of allah , and do not seek to make a clear trace of them , except in order to be clear to them , but do not be an open word for them , except for what they have done . and ever is allah , of what they do not ,
do they then feel secure against the plan of allah ? but none feels secure from allah 's plan except thoseto ruin !
and by him who created the male and female ,
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and whatever is in them , and he has power over all things .
then a welcome of inferno .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
o believers , enter the peace , all of you , and follow not the steps of satan ; he is a clear enemy to you .
and never does a new advice come to them from the most gracious , but they turn away from it .
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
o children of israel ! we have put you in the place of the life of the world in the world to come ; so follow the judgement in the matter of god , and follow the law of the god ; for them is a painful punishment .
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
o people who believe ! follow the follow of the follow , and do not follow the one who follows the account of the devil ; indeed the devil is the most inclined , and he does not have mercy on the account of allah , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
we shall save your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . many people are heedless of our signs .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
even after we are crumbled bones ?
but he who comes to him with faith and righteous works shall be exalted to high ranks ,
and in the alternation of night and day , and in the provision that allah sends down from the sky , and thereby revives the earth after its death , and in the circulation of the winds , are signs for a people who understand .
and he sought among the birds and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
and remember , o dear prophet , , in the car , and think that the hereafter will not be heard . so woe to me , my lord ! i am indeed one of the ignorant .
then we facilitated . how well do we calculate !
verily in thisis a message for people who wouldworship allah .
and this ceased not to be their cry until we made them cut off , extinguished .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and whatever is between them , and whatever is under the ground .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
say : who guardeth you in the night and by day from the beneficent allah ? nay , but they turn away from mention of their lord .
o you who believe ! be patient , and advocate patience , and be united , and revere allah , so that you may succeed .
the day when we launch the great assault—we will avenge .
and whoever is opposed to allah , be patient , and be dutiful to him ; this is better , for the lord of the book , so that you may be of the losers .
andone who is brought up among ornaments , and can not make herself clear ?
and leg will be joined with another leg
all this ; so let them taste it , boiling water and pus ,
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
my people , i ask of you no reward for this . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
these are the people of the right hand .
by allah , we were indeed in manifest error
neither man nor jinn will be questioned on that day about his sin .
on that day , friends will be enemies of one another , except for the righteous .
and hasten to forgiveness from your lord and a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth , prepared for the righteous
they will have sheets of fire above them and sheets of fire . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
rude and fake besides .
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
and presently he shall become wellpleased .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and desire to divide between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in some , ' desiring to take between the two ,
give the orphans their wealth , and do not exchange the bad for the good , and do not consume their propertyto your own property ; this is indeed a great sin .
and do not argue on behalf of those who deceive themselves ; surely god loves not the guilty traitor .
in it is a flowing spring
how can there be for the associators a covenant with allah , and his messenger , except those with whom you covenanted ? then as long as they are honest with you , take the right path with them . allah loves the righteous .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god did not avail them when your lord 's command came , and they added to them nothing but destruction .
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
there is no way for a believer , except to a believer ; but if a man is faithful , he is a believer , a man of pure faith . but if a man is to believe in him , then he is a muhsin . but if he is a muslim , then it is a true command .
the men of believing women , men and women alike , both men and women , and men , women , and women -- and men , women , and women -- both men , women , and women -- surely , we have given them a mighty wage , from god , a great reward .
and thamood , sparing no one .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
he it is who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , in six days ; then allah makes the throne a matter to be established , and it is the same for him to have no protector or friend .
and give you increase in wealth and children and provide for you gardens and bestow on you rivers .
it is prescribed for you that when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind a bequest , he should bequeath it equitably for his parents and relatives , according to reasonable usage ; this is a duty upon the pious .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
and drink boiling water on top of it ,
and hell made visible to those who had gone astray .
and by him who created the male and female ,
and we will surely let man see the mother of maryam , and if they are the ones of the believers , then surely , should they have been the believers . so do not be of the ones who have been given knowledge .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , seeing i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
and when a group among them said , “ why do you preach to a people whom allah is going to destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
and if ye are in doubt concerning that which we have sent down unto our slave , then bring a surah like thereunto , and call your witnesses , apart from god , if ye are truthful .
why , when the word is recited to you , , god is the one god . he has given you the favors before this , and he has given you the favors , if you only see .
then they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
if only there had been a communitythat believed and profited by its faith . but , when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them comfort for a while .
what we have revealed to you is a revelation from us . but what we have revealed to you is a clear word , and what is the matter with it , as a guidance and a guide for the straight path .
thamood , belied their messengers .
who hears the verses of allah being recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
then it will be for us to call them to account .
and be moderatein your walking , and lower your voice . verily , the harshest of all voices is the voiceof the ass .
the magicians fell down prostrate .
he is a sign of the hour . so have no doubt about it , and follow me . this is a straight path .
but those who have believed and those who have emigrated and fought in the cause of allah - those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
is he who walks in the land , so that he may be responsible for it ? is there any sign for them in the least ? or is there a sign in allah , above that they associate with him ?
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
those who speak the reward of allah and his messenger , and make a hole in the land , he will say , ‘ shall be your enemies , so that you shall be consigned to drink . ’ it is expected for them to be a great punishment .
does he think that no one sees him ?
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for this end he created them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinns and men all together . ”
the companions of the left
after them we raised a new generation .
say : 'he will quicken them who originated them the first time ; he has knowledge of every creation ;
butrejected it and disobeyed ;
god knows what is in the hour . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies , and he knows everything .
they said , “ we wish to eat from it , so that we may satisfy our hearts and know that you have spoken the truth to us and be among its witnesses . ”
and there is a tree in which the sky is sent down , and the tree of its lord ’ s command. is the shameful ; and this is how we explain the signs for a people who are wise .
when the baby was born she said , “ my lord , it is a female . god knows best what he has been concealing . i have named her mary . i have named her mary , and he is the outcast . ”
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
to god belong the angels , in which the human being set out , and his command is to be seen by god 's command . god 's plan is not to be seen of anyone , no one can save them in the least .
you will die , and they will die .
and certainly , you will not seek to do something , nor can they question you . but they will surely be called to account , but they have no faith in the truth . but if they turn away , then they will not be sorry , and allah will punish them in the matter .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom shall be the curse of allah and of angles and of men combined .
it is lawful for you to hunt from the sea and to eat from it as provision for you and for travelers . and hunting is forbidden for you in the land while you are in pilgrim sanctity . and fear allah to whom you will be gathered .
from a sperm-drop when it is emitted
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
and it was said , 'earth , swallow up your waters . ' o heaven , the water subsided , and the waters subsided , and the affair was accomplished , and the ark came to rest on thejudiyy .
do not bestow favours in expectation of return ,
and when they commit an indecency , they say : we found our fathers doing this , and allah has enjoined it on us . say : surely allah does not enjoin indecency . do you say of allah what you do not know ?
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
and the even and the odd ,
—the day when man will remember his endeavours
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you shall be returned .
or askest thou them for a wage , and so they are weighed down with debt ?
or who is it that will provide for you if he withholds his provision ? yet they persist in defiance and aversion .
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
they say : when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then be raised up again ?
except those who are patient and do righteous deeds . those will have forgiveness and a great reward .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
and recall what time we have revealed a word unto thee , that thou mayest listen unto them , and that ye may listen to the truth , when it is said unto them : listen unto the people of the stiff-necked , when it hath been revealed unto them .
or , who is it that there is no other god besides him ? when he calls upon them , he will say to them : what ! do you then deny the truth ?
we destroyed the villages around you and showed them the evidenceso that perhaps they would return .
allah will make them swear by allah , they said : surely , if we bring a clear proof to you , they will believe in you . say , ‘ indeed it is only allah , to whom you will have no faith . maybe you will believe in it . ’
they shall have what they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the doers of good .
and the story of noah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i am going to speak the signs of allah , when he said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , i will bring you the verses of allah , and then do not come back to me . then , do not be among the skeptics .
so i warn you of a fire blazing fiercely ;
a multitude from the ancients .
turn to him , and fear him , and be steadfast in prayer , and do not be of the idolaters ,
who avoid whatever is vain and frivolous ;
to your lord on that day shall be the driving .
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
o believers , advance not before god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
when the truth came to them from us , they said , ‘ your immaculate omens are with us , but they did not have any faith in what you had been commanded , ’ ‘ indeed we are not going to be there . ’ ‘ ‘ indeed we are not its guardians . ’
see how we have preferred some of them over others ; and surely the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they ask one of another ,
and if we let man taste mercy from us , and then withdraw it from him , he becomes despairing and ungrateful .
when allah made a covenant with the people of the book to make it known to mankind and not conceal it . they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a small price . evil indeed is their bargain .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah watches what you do .
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
all food was lawful to the children of israel except what israel forbade himself before the torah was revealed . say : 'bring the torah and recite it , if you are truthful . '
you are inviting them to a straight path .
the dwellers of the forest also rejected the messengers .
save him who may eavesdrop , and then a bright flame pursues him .
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
and we made them leaders inviting to the fire , and on the day of judgement they will not be helped .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
by the witness and the witnessed ,
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
that is because allah is the protector of the believers , and because the disbelievers have no protector .
to him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth , at nightfall and when you enter noontime .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
the likeness of those who disbelieve is as the likeness of one who shouteth unto that which heareth naught except a call and a cry . deaf , dumb , blind , so they do not understand .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are weak .
until there came to usthat is certain .
so they will acknowledge their sins , but far will befrom the inmates of the burning fire .
and we made them leaders who guide by our command , and we revealed to them the doing of good deeds , establishment of prayer and giving zakah , and they were worshippers of us .
they were near to seducing thee from that we revealed to thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend ;
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
the punishment will be doubled for him on the day of resurrection , and he will abide in it forever ,
say : if allah had so willed , i should not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have dwelled among you for a lifetime before it .
and of some of the wealth are those who are given the property of their hearts , that they shall be made to drink of their houses , and if there be for them a thing of their deeds , my remembrance is indeed ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
when misfortune befalls you at sea , all those you invoke except him . but when he delivers you to land , you turn away from him . man is ever ungrateful .
so when the stars are obliterated
those of you who put away their wives by pronouncing zihar their mothers are not their mothers . their mothers are none but those who gave birth to them . and indeed , they utter a saying , and indeed , allah is pardoning and forgiving .
and made to drink from a boiling spring .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , 'this is my lord . ' but when it set , he said , 'if my lord does not guide me , i shall surely be among the astray people . '
he said : i saw what they did not see , so i seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger , and then i flung it . thus my soul prompted me .
said moosa , “ o haroon – what prevented you when you saw them going astray ? ”
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
and if you ask them , who created the heavens and the earth , they will surely say : allah . say : all the praises and thanks be to allah ! but most of them do not know .
and watch them , for they will soon see .
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
they said : shall we believe in two men like ourselves , and whose people are servile unto us ?
those who disbelieve in god and his messengers , and desire to divide between god and his messengers , and say , 'we believe in some , and disbelieve in some , ' desiring to take between the two ,
even after we are crumbled bones ?
but satan whispered to them , to reveal to them what was hidden from them of their shameful parts . he said , “ your lord has forbidden you this tree , lest you become angels , or become immortals . ”
.
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit ; it shall come forth white , without evil ; that is a second sign .
and when the qur ’ an is recited to him , they were drowned and then they became subject to their ruin , and when they are set up to allah , they begin to be devoted to the way .
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
and what will explain to thee what hell-fire is ?
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut at early morn .
this is the reward of allah to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : ' i do not ask you any reward for it . ' say , “ it is not for you to be rewarded by anything except his own good ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most appreciative . ”
they said , have you brought us the truth , or are you one of those who jest ?
and if ye follow the word , - the word is your opinion ; and if the one among them should be in the affair , let it be the word of allah . and allah is of that which ye work a witness .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god ; how then are you perverted ?
remind , if the reminder can be of benefit .
their lord gives them good news of mercy from himself , and of his good pleasure ; for them await gardens wherein is lasting bliss ,
on the day when he will say : call those partners of mine whom ye pretended . then they will cry unto them , but they will not answer them , and we shall place between them a partition .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
whoever submits his face to god and is a doer of good , has grasped the most trustworthy handle . with god rests the outcome of all events .
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
this is the way of the life to come . in fact , it is the tradition of god . it is the same for you . it is the same for you to have the right direction . this is the law of god , the lord of the universe .
moses said , your appointment is the day of the festival , and let the people assemble when the sun has risen .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
i will cast him into hell-fire
and the sun and the moon are made to light in order to reach the sun , and to the light which is right ; and what is just like a confirmation of what is right . and fear allah , that you may be al-muttaqun .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
then he turned his back , striving .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of those before them . they disbelieved in the signs of allah and so allah seized them for their sins . indeed , allah is powerful and severe in penalty .
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
and we rained on them a rain . and evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
so be thou not in doubt concerning that which theseworship . they worship only as their fathers worshipped before : and verily we shall pay them their portion undiminished .
we have given you the book , a book which is blessed in it , according to the name of god on account of the wisdom . but when the matter is given to them , inform them of the law of the world , when it has been decided to them . this is how we make you a pious person .
have you not seen that allah has full knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? there is no partnership in the case of allah , the rising of each other 's . there is no changer of worship except him . it is only he who has knowledge of what they have earned ; and he is the most disputatious of all things .
and at night . do you not understand ?
faces on that day shall be downcast ,
we have circulated it among them , that they may remember , but most men refuse all but unbelief .
and we gave them the book which helps to make things clear ;
this is because they defied allah and his apostle ; and whoever opposes allah and his apostle – then indeed allah ’ s punishment is severe .
and if thou speakest the word thou wouldst , then thou word to be of the unbelievers , when they say unto the unbelievers : when shall the fellows of the unbelievers be brought forth ? behold , we are the infidels .
and when you are told at the mention of the fire , it is near at their marks . , it is true , , in the case of this book , it is true . , it will be said to them , “ if you have finished the matter , it is true ; and god is all-hearing , all-knowing . ”
and on the day when he will gather them , as if they had not remainedbut an hour of the day , they will recognize each other . those who denied the meeting with allah will be losers .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been oppressed , and then fought and remained patient – indeed your lord thereafter is oft forgiving , most merciful .
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely to be recognized and not harmed . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
then god caused his tranquillity to descend upon his messenger and upon the believers , and sent down hosts you did not see , and punished the unbelievers ; and that is the recompense of the unbelievers .
'we are laden with debts !
whoever commits evil , does but only consent to his own , and the reward of the two men , whom he has given the truth , will be admitted to paradise . it is they who are the everlasting abode .
in which are high thrones .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
most surely it is the word of a noble messenger ,
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
good and evil are not equal . repel evil with what is good , then you will see that he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and a similarthe disbelievers .
we then kept it in a safe place .
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the moving creatures which he has dispersed in them ; and he is able to gather them whenever he will .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
except to an apostle he approves of . then he dispatches a sentinel before and behind him
and thus we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
say , o people , the truth has come to you from your lord . whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray only strays to his own detriment . i am not a guardian over you .
and we left for themamong later generations :
hinderer of the good , transgressor , malefactor
and food that chokes , and a painful torment
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary . ’
have they taken protectorsbesides him ? but allah , he is the protector , and he quickeneth the dead , and he is over everything potent .
that was because their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they said , ‘ will humans be our guides ? ’ so they disbelieved and turned away , and allah was free of need ; and allah is free of need and praiseworthy .
assuredly allah hath succoured you on many fields , andon the day of hunain , when your multitude elated you , but it availed you naught , and the earth , for all its vastness , constrained you , and ye turned back in retreat .
and they were guided to goodly speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
o you who believe ! be conscious of a fire from the people who are the faithful , and the fire of hell , which is ablaze to you . it is only the nemesis of allah , and they are not aware of it .
so be patient ! allah ’ s promise is indeed true . and let not those who do not have faith make you impatient .
god has made the light light which he has made a light for the welfare of men and the birds as well as the adornment of the people and the birds . this is what god has created in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things .
“ those whose efforts in this world are misguided , while they assume that they are doing good deeds . ”
strike with thy foot : here iswherein to wash , cool and refreshing , andto drink .
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : take you habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
they make it a favour to theethat they have surrendered . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
for every nation we have appointed rites which they observe . so let them not dispute with you about the matter , but invite them to your lord . indeed , you are upon a straight guidance .
he said , “ my lord , i fear that they will deny me . ”
verily it shall close upon them ,
and a multitude of the later people .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? rather , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in torment and in far error .
we did not send you except as mercy to mankind .
surely your lord is gracious to men , but most of them are not thankful .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
he gambled and lost .
and when thou lookest them thou shalt behold delight and a dominion magnificent .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
they said , ‘ we will solicit him from his father.we will surely do . ’
if he were to ask you for them and press you , you would covetously withhold , and he would expose your unwillingness .
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
bear patiently what they say , and remember our servant david , the man of strength ; surely he was frequent in returning .
we are eager that our lord should forgive us our offenses , for we are the first of the believers '
or has he taken for himself daughters from what he creates and favored you with sons ?
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
those who have believed and left their homes and fought in the way of allah with their wealth and their lives are greater in rank with allah . it is they who are the winners .
say , “ i worship only allah , and i do not ascribe any partner to him . ”
they said : nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they keep disputing .
and we shaded you with clouds and sent down on you the manna and the quails , : eat of the good things we have provided for you : they did not wrong us , but they wronged themselves .
they said : nay , but we found our fathers doing so .
then , when he saw the sun rising , he said : this is my lord . this is greater . but when it set , he said : o my people ! lo ! i am quit of that which ye associate .
then , has your lord chosen you forsons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and verily thine shall be a hire unending .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
it will come upon them suddenly when they are not expecting it .
by thosescatteringdispersing
and who preserve their trusts and pledges
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
thus , we have made the quran clear to you , so we reveal to them the book . they said : “ if only you could see a day , or part of a day . so let them look at the time of a day . let them have the right course . so let them be free from want , so that they may take heed .
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
we have sent down to you a book that mentions you . do you not understand ?
say , “ my prayer and my worship , and my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the creation . ”
then , on that day , you will be questioned about the blessing .
worship none but allah , and his offspring , and the needy and the traveller , and the relatives , the near of kin ; and the kindred , in truth , are near . allah does not love the extravagant .
and his mother , to the throne , to the throne he supreme ; and they chose him , and he said , ‘ my father ! ‘ my father ! indeed , it is the speech that you have been doing . indeed , my lord is the best of what i have been doing . indeed , he is the knowing , the wise .
the day when we shall roll up the heavens like a scroll rolled up for books , as we began the first creation , we shall repeat it . a promise binding upon us ; indeed , we will do it .
except in the course of the book , except that the people of the book may say , ‘ we have believed in it , except those who do wrong . and indeed , we have been muslims . ’
he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
so we made it an exemplary punishment for the present and the succeeding , and an advice to the godwary .
for those who do good is a fine reward and a surplus ; neither dust nor abasement shall overspread their faces . these are the inhabitants of paradise , therein dwelling forever .
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
and whatever you spend or whatever vows you vow , surely allah knows it ; and the unjust do not have supporters .
and when it is said to them , believe as the peoplehave believed , they say , should we believe as fools have believed ? unquestionably , they themselves are fools , but they do not know .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
and follow the best of what has been sent down to you from your lord , before the punishment comes upon you suddenly , while you are unaware .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
the women of women shall be divorced , so be thou exposed to the sun and the moon , so be thou not permitted unto them , and that which allah hath created , if they are to believe in allah and the last day ; and if they are to give their share in the life of the world , then verily they are unto the tillage of the hereafter .
besides allah ? they will say : they have failed us . in fact , we used not to call upon anything before . thus does allah send astray the disbelievers .
if you meet them in battle , treat them with those behind them so that they remember .
allah created you ; then he causes you to die ; and some of you will be brought back to an extremely old age , so that they may know nothing after having acquired knowledge ; surely allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
but you wonder , while they mock ,
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
the people of the book are the ones who have received the book . it has been revealed to you what has been revealed to you . they are the people of the whole book . say , i am commanded to worship god and to him you will all return .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
this is the reward of allah to those who believe and do righteous deeds . say : ' i do not ask you any reward for it . ' say , “ it is not for you to be rewarded by anything except his own good ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most appreciative . ”
and all those on earth .
said , lord , i have power over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
and a few from the latter ones .
o ye that are sprung from those whom we carriedwith noah ! lo ! he was a grateful slave .
devotedand of equal age ,
when joseph said to his father , “ o my father , i saw eleven stars , and the sun and the moon ; i saw them prostrating themselves to me . ”
to warn whosoever liveth , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and all of you will remain in it .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
do you think that you will enter paradise while allah has not yet ascertained those of you who foughtandtests those who are as-sabirin ?
our lord , forgive me and my parents and all the believers on the day of reckoning .
he has sent down to you the book with truth , confirming what wasbefore it , and he sent down the torah and the gospel
does man think that he will be left alone to himself , free ?
follow what is revealed to you from your lord . god is fully aware of what you do .
and warn your near relations ,
andothers who have acknowledged their sins , they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was evil . perhaps allah will turn to them in mercy . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
indeed the godwary will be in a safe place ,
the day on which men shall be as scattered moths ,
and nuh cried unto his lord and said : my lord ! lo ! my son is of my household , and verily thy promise is the truth , and thou art the most just of the judges .
“ yes , allah ’ s duty is upon you ; and if there are twenty among you , patient , they will vanquish two groups , and if there are a hundred , then allah ’ s bounds—and allah is with the two groups . ”
call on your lord humbly and secretly . he does not love the transgressors .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
if you fear , be certain of the birth of a human being with the two , the women of two or four groups . if you fear that you may be wary of one another , or should have fear of one another , it is likely that you are equal to the wrongdoers .
if you disclose your charities , it is well , but if you conceal them and give them to the poor , that is better for you , and will acquit you of some of your misdeeds ; and allah is aware of what you do .
then hell is the shelter .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to stumble in it , and said : go down , being enemies of one another ! and on earth shall be your abode and your provision for a time .
your striving is indeed to different ends !
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
and indeed for the unjust is another punishment before this , but most of them do not know .
and he drew out his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is forgiving and kind .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
and they said , “ whatever sign you may bring us to bewitch us , we will not believe in you . ”
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
then we will surely bring you magic like it , so make between us and you an appointment , which neither we nor you shall fail to keep , in a place assigned .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and have appointed the night as a cloak ,
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
thus they were overcome and made to look abiect .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
we created the human being and we know what his soul whispers to him . we are closer to him than his jugular vein .
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they boasted and exulted at the knowledge they had , of what they had mocked .
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
we therefore rescued him and his entire family .
if you meet them in battle , treat them with those behind them so that they remember .
whoever desires the reward of this world , then with allah is the reward of this world and the hereafter . and ever is allah hearing and seeing .
look ! they fold their breasts , to hide from him . but when they cover themselves with their garments , he knows what they conceal and what they reveal . he knows what lies within the hearts .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only for a little while .
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
in the gardens of bliss .
say , perhaps some of the things which you wish to experience immediately are close to you .
the prophet said , “ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your parents following ? ” they would say , “ we reject what you have been sent with . ”
and we are not going to be punished .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , it is they who are the liars .
after them we raised a new generation .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
and why should we not believe in allah and in the truth that has come to us , and we yearn for our lord to admit us among the righteous ?
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
and to us belong the last and the first .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
a multitude from the ancients .
and for them therein arebenefits and drinks , so will they not be grateful ?
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with the qur'an a great striving .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
anxious when an ill befalls him
in his place they invoke only females ; and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
and whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
except an old woman who stayed behind ,
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
and as to the light , , two , two , two , say , has he forbidden the two males , or the two females , or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? ” or , the two females , the two females are , or the two females , or that he may inform them ?
they and their spouses , reclining on couches in the shade .
does he not know that allah sees ?
has there come to you the story of the hosts
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of those before them . they disbelieved in the signs of allah and so allah seized them for their sins . indeed , allah is powerful and severe in penalty .
he said : surely i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
allah has set forth the example of the people of noah and the people of lot to the unbelievers who had become two of the faithless . they were both of the same for the unbelievers . they will be told , enter the fire which will be the home of hell .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
say : if allah had so willed , i should not have recited it to you , nor would he have made it known to you . i have dwelled among you for a lifetime before it .
we have believed in our lord so that he may forgive us our sins and the magic to which you compelled us . god is better and more lasting .
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i have only one . he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
then they turned , one against another , in reproach .
gardens of perpetual residence which they will enter , along with whoever is righteous from among their fathers , their spouses and their descendants . the angels will enter upon them from every gate ,
so we took retribution from them ; then see how was the end of the deniers .
no indeed ! soon they will disown their worship , and they will be their opponents .
is itthen , when it hath befallen you , that ye will believe ? and ye werefor it impatient .
and lo ! my curse is on thee till the day of judgment .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
as accommodation from aforgiving and merciful .
o believers , expend of what we have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession . those who deny the truth are the unjust .
and indeed , those who disbelieve - they said , allah is the one god . there is no deity except him . if they do not have any option , he is only the one god ; and if the unbelievers do not know .
they said : our lord ! place a word between us and the people of the calf , so we made them mention of the people of the qur'an : verily , in this there is a sign for people who have done evil .
when shuaib said to them , 'will you not be godfearing ?
then we raised after him other messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they were not such as to believe in that which they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
verily i am allah . there is no allah save me . so serve me and establish prayer for my remembrance .
and deem not allah negligent of that which the wrong-doers work : he only deferreth them to a day whereon the sighthall remain staring .
and hath made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
say : i am not a new thing among the messengers , nor do i know what will be done with me or with you . i only follow that which is revealed to me , and i am but a plain warner .
but my call added only to their flight .
had allah willed , he could have made you one nation , but he leads astray whom he wills and guides whom he wills . and you will surely be questioned about what you used to do .
and were witnessing what they did to the believers .
accursed , they will be seized wherever found and slain with aslaughter .
peace be on abraham .
it is a written record ,
they have taken their oaths for a shield , so they turn away from the way of allah . evil indeed is what they do .
those who conceal what allah has sent down of the book and sell it for a small price , take nothing in it but fire . and allah will neither speak to them nor purify them . theirs shall be a painful punishment .
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
and leave the sea becalmed ; they are a drowned host . '
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire should touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah , and you will not be helped .
this qur'an is not such as could have been invented by other than allah . it confirms what was before it , and a detailed exposition of the book in which there is no doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
we are eager that our lord should forgive us our offenses , for we are the first of the believers '
has the story of moses reached you ?
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
verily those who say : our lord is allah , and remain firm , - on them shall be no fear , nor shall they grieve .
not at all – but rather you do not honour the orphan .
and be not like those who came forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
so whither do you stray ?
and to us belong the last and the first .
and those who distributeby command ,
and the duty of his people is just a perfect command ; and only the extent of its deeds is only for his own good , and the only decision is for his own good ; “ our lord , do not let us be a prey to the right way ; and our lord , do not have mercy upon us , except as you have been doing ; and do not be among the skeptics . ”
and we raised him to a high position .
your god is one ,
so we inflicted retribution on them , and drowned them in the sea , because they rejected our signs and were heedless of them .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
except those who repent , and mendand clarify . those i shall accept them . i am the receiver of repentance , the most merciful .
guide us to the straight path ,
you are receiving the quran from one all-wise and all-knowing .
these towns—we narrate to you some of their tales . their messengers came to them with clear proofs , but they would not believe what they had rejected before . thus god seals the hearts of the unbelievers .
god created every creature from water . some of them go on their bellies , and some of them go on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
or receive someadvice which would benefit him .
he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and he knows what you conceal and what you reveal . and allah is the all-knower of what is in the breasts .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who work righteousness .
what is that in your right hand , moses '
on the day when every soul finds its good guidance , it will see its good and good deeds . the guilty will wish that it had been a great veil among them . god warns you about himself . god is kind towards the servants .
said : 'follow the book , ' i will not be able to say : 'let you be given a book . so do not be able to change it . what we shall do with the sea ' ; this is what we make with the sea .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
he said : would that i had strength to resist you or had some strong support !
o you who have faith ! when you be seated to be given to those who are made to enter the same way , they are made to keep the right direction , and if you should be able to keep them away , then you will be able to receive the reward of allah , and if you have done so , then surely allah is aware of what you do .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave the prophethood and the book to his descendants . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
when the truth came to them from us they said : 'this is indeed clear magic '
indeed , the messengers before you had denied , but they came to them on account of their faith . so they will be given guidance until they have no faith in it . and we will certainly tell them of the book of clear evidence .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and is virtuous , and follows the religion of ibrahimhanifa ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
those who deny the day of recompense .
the people of pharaoh . will they not fear god ?
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
and do not rebuke the beggar .
we never sent a warner to a village except that thosein luxury said : 'we disbelieve in the message you have been sent with '
the word of paradise is revealed to paradise . the righteous will be brought by the streams of paradise wherein streams flow . what is the matter with you , if only you could live for ever ?
o people , you have been born on the day of your lord when he has begotten a son . the words of god will not be able to make a son . the promise of god is true . so do not let the torment of the hereafter deceive you .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
and when our messengers came to lot , he was troubled and distressed for them , and said : 'this is a harsh day '
with the help of allah . he succoureth whomsoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
and if they deny you , say , “ for me are my deeds , and for you are your deeds ; you are innocent of what i do , and i am clear of what you do . ”
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
o my son ! if it should be but the weight of a grain of mustard seed , and though it be in a rock , or in the heavens or in the earth , allah shall bring it forth . lo ! allah is subtile , aware .
say : i have no power over any harm or benefit for myself , except what allah may will . for every nation there is an appointed time . when their time comes , they can not delay it by a single hour nor can they advance it .
when the truth came to them from us they said : 'this is indeed clear magic '
and they will be given to drink there of a cupmixed with zanjabil , -
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
and indeed we bestowed grace on david from us : o you mountains , sing the praises of allah with him , and we made iron soft for him .
and the hypocrites will call unto the believers , and we have not been vouchsafed unto you . but they will say : yea , for ye have been sent by . therefor fear allah , and hath taken them away . and the satan hath gone astray , and he hath barred them from a thing .
yet it may be that my lord will give me something better than your garden , and send upon it a thunderbolt from heaven , so that it will be a barren plain ,
he said , you are strangers .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
there is a salutation for the people of the way , which is the way of god . it is the same for you , and the same is a source of heart . god is the rich and the most merciful .
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least , except by allah 's leave . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
then , has your lord chosen you forsons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and we used to deny the day of recompense
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and his lord was set in favour of the most honourable lord , so he made them speak to his servant , and he showed them the good news , and said , ‘ mary , it is from allah , to whom he pleases , and he causes the provisions to whom he wills . indeed , allah is ever unaware of what he will .
but those who cry lies to him -- so they cried lies , and they said : we have heard a word . so say , the word is not at the command of god . so say : 'no , god has no authority . ' no , they are rightly guided .
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein ; and this is the reward of him who has purified himself .
ha-meem .
the league will be routed and turn their backs .
so indeed with hardship is ease .
as for the unbelievers , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
and , o dear prophet , there is not a revelation in the manner of his people , but when evil is intended for them , it is only what he says . but when evil is satan 's , he is the knower of the truth , and allah is the knower , the wise .
when two parties among you were about to lose heart , god was their protector . in god let the believers put their trust .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
they said , “ we consider you an evil omen , and those with you. ” he said , “ your omen is with god ; in fact you are a people being tested . ”
never think that allah will fail in his promise to his messengers . indeed allah is all-mighty , avenger .
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
he said : o chiefs ! which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission ?
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is by due measure .
tidings containing a deterrent have come to them
who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
o mankind ! we have created you from a male and female , and made you nations and tribes so that you may recognise each other . he who has more integrity has indeed greater honour with allah . indeed allah is all-knowing , all-aware .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they only lead themselves astray , and they do not realize it .
i have chosen you , so listen to what is revealed .
verily man is impatient by nature :
and abundant fruit ,
god will admit the righteously striving believers into the gardens wherein streams flow . they will be decked in it with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their garments therein will be of silk .
then his lord chose him , and relented toward him , and guided him .
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least , and for them is a painful punishment .
and the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with good things and evil that haply they might return .
for those who believe not in the hereafter is an evil similitude , and allah 's is the loftiest likeness ; he is the mighty , the wise .
we created not the heavens , the earth , and all between them , merely insport :
the people of lot rejected the messengers .
he said : yes , and you will then become those near-stationed to me .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and avoid the polytheists .
and we have sent down the qur ’ an upon you , and indeed , he sends down the book before you , and the qur ’ an has been revealed to the commands of allah , and in accordance with the commands of allah between them , so that he may inform you of what they used to do .
until we opened the gate of greater tormentand they suddenly found themselves in despair .
and there is not a moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on allah . he knoweth its habitation and its repository . all is in a clear book .
the proud leaders of his people said , “ o shuaib , we will banish you and those who believe with you from our town , unless you return to our religion. ” he said , “ even if we are unwilling ? ”
say : 'allah suffices as a witness between me and you . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth . those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in god , those are they who are the losers '
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
what remains with allah is better for you if you are believers , and i am not a keeper over you .
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and by the angels who regulate the affairs , .
that which they spend in the life of this world is like a biting frosty blast which smites the harvest of a people who wronged themselves , and destroys it . allah did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
those whose hearts tremble when allah is mentioned , and those who patiently bear whatever visits them , and who establish prayer and spendout of what we have provided them .
did you see him who turned away ,
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
it is not for any believer , man or woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into manifest error .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth , and whatever is between them , and whatever is under the ground .
moses showed him the great miracle
and do not incline toward those who do wrong , lest the fire should touch you , and you have no protectors other than allah , and you will not be helped .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
nay , but ye thought that the messenger and the believers would never return to their families , and that was made fairseeming in your hearts , and ye conceived evil thoughts , and ye were a people doomed to perish .
those who conceal what allah has sent down of the book and sell it for a small price , take nothing in it but fire . and allah will neither speak to them nor purify them . theirs shall be a painful punishment .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
but all , without exception , will be brought before us .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave the prophethood and the book to his descendants . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat ; and the fire shall be their lodging .
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : lo ! ye commit lewdness such as no creature did before you .
no one but the sinners led us astray .
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
those who were proud will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who prevented you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you yourselves were criminals .
andlout , when he said to his people : do you commit such immorality as no one has preceded you with from among the worlds ?
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant toward the doors of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
perhaps our lord will give us a better substitute for it . we turn to our lord in supplication .
call on your lord humbly and secretly . he does not love the transgressors .
glory be to him who carried his servant by night from the holy mosque to the farthest mosque whose precincts we have blessed , that we might show him some of our signs . indeed , he is the hearing , the seeing .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while an evil punishment encompassed pharaoh 's people .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
and by those who glide along ,
nay , we are deprived .
say , o people , i am only to you a clear warner .
so enter the gates of hell , to dwell therein for ever . woeful indeed will be the lodging of the arrogant .
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph behind with our things , and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
, eat of the good things we have provided for you , but do not transgress lest my wrath should descend upon you . he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen .
there is nothing but our life in this world ! we die and we live , and we are not going to be raised again .
for over my servants no authority shalt thou have , except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow thee .
then , as for him whose scales are heavy ,
verily those who hath a covenant a small price for them , is not the word of allah , on the day of resurrection , and allah approveth not a word , and theirs shall be a torment afflictive .
a reward for what they used to do .
then they will have no excuse but to say , by allah our lord , we were not polytheists .
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god is witness to what they do .
and keep vigil in part of the night as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a laudable station .
and recite to them the story of ibrahim .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . this is the straight path .
the human being is doomed to suffer loss ,
i swear by the evening glow ,
o people who believe ! when the call for prayer is made on the day of congregation , hasten to the remembrance of allah and leave off business . that is better for you if you only knew .
and the angels will be on its sides , and on that day eight will carry above them the throne of your lord .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of recompense .
when the earth is shaken with its quake .
and whoever shuns the remembrance of the most gracious , we appoint for him a devil , to be his companion .
they said , burn him and help your gods , if you are going to do .
and they turned their backs on him and went away .
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
and it was said , “ o nooh ! bring down it from us , the matter is at the distance of the two , and in order to be clear – from before us and upon you – and on the contrary – we too are waiting for you . ”
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
when he said unto his folk : will ye not ward off ?
where they will abide for ever , never wanting a change .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , jesus and job , and jonah and aaron and solomon , and we gave to david psalms ,
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair has turned white with age , and i have never been disappointed in supplicating you . ”
so indeed with hardship is ease .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when hosts came against you , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and maketh peace between the parties , no sin is there for him : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
like those shortly before them . they experienced the consequences of their decisions . for them is a painful punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
and it was revealed unto nuh : verily none of thy people will believe save those who have believed already . so be not distressed because of what they used to do .
god knows what is in the hour . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies . he knows what is in your bellies , and he knows everything .
the hypocrites , men and women , are all alike . they enjoin evil , and forbid what is wrong , and withhold their hands . they have forgotten god , so he has forgotten them . the hypocrites are indeed the transgressors .
'what has sped thee far from thy people , moses ? '
alif , lam , ra . a book whose verses were perfected and then elaborated , from oneall-wise , all-aware ,
see what similes they strike for thee : but they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
he it is who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and allah sees what you do .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is sickness said , “ their religion has deluded these people. ” but whoever puts his trust in god—god is mighty and wise .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is hafizover them , and you are not a keeper over them .
verily we ! we have sent it down on the night of power .
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god besides him ; otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would assuredly have overcome others . glory be to god , above that they describe !
andone who is brought up among ornaments , and can not make herself clear ?
and we appointed companions for them , who made their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
with clear proofs and scriptures . and we have sent down the reminder to you so that you may clarify for the people what was sent down to them , and that they may reflect .
they only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the truth .
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was the punishment of a great day .
gardens and vineyards ,
they said , “ o moses , we will never enter it , as long as they are in it . go , you and your lord , and fight . we will stay here . ”
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , why do you give the lie to the coming of the dead while you know ? indeed , i have been the people of the sinners . ”
saying : lo ! when we were with our families , we were ever anxious .
and whenever any patience has been set , they remember allah just as the command of allah , even as they are reminded of the truth , and say , ‘ our lord ! give us something better than this . indeed , he is from it heedless . ’
a warning to mankind ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
and gave a little , then stopped ?
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
and hath made the moon a light therein , and made the sun a lamp ?
and will abide under this burden for ever . evil will be their burden on the day of resurrection .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ,
say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability and act according to our station .
verily we have sent thee with the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
they said , call on your lord for us to make plain to us what her color should be . he answered , god says she should be a bright yellow heifer , pleasing to the eye .
the day when they will be shoved forcibly toward the fire of hell ,
and do not defraud people in their property or spread evil in the land .
say , ‘ tell the truthful ones that allah has sent down to you ; and if they should give the clear message , then you should be patient and do not follow the desires of those who do not believe in our ayat , and who do not believe in the hereafter . ’
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your reckoning .
but the word is revealed to him . no word is revealed to him . it is only he who calls us . it is the command of him . say : 'you are witness to what we have submitted .
and leg will be joined with another leg
a revelation from the most benevolent , ever-merciful ,
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
the indubitable !
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
“ yes , allah ’ s duty is upon you ; and if there are twenty among you , patient , they will vanquish two groups , and if there are a hundred , then allah ’ s bounds—and allah is with the two groups . ”
so taste my punishment and my warnings .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
and whoever does an atom ’ s weight of evil will see it .
and in them are numerous benefits for you , and that you may through them attain a need in your chests , and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
god knows the unseen in the heavens and the earth . he knows what the hearts contain .
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
allah will make those who believe , in the life of this world and the hereafter , and in the hereafter they will be subdued . and indeed , the wrongdoers will be zalimun .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink thereof to that which we have created of cattle and men .
and the earth he laidfor the creatures .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
if you do not , then take notice of war from god and his messenger . but if you repent , you may have your principal . oppress none and you will not be wronged .
surely those who believe , and those who are judaised , and those who are judaised , or the worship of the angels , or the birds , - the angels , are the ones who are true . allah will judge between them . verily , allah is ever a witness over all things .
and when the noble messenger from allah has come to them , they will be held accountable for them ; and he knows what they have before , and the disbelievers had already rejected the truth . so , let the disbelievers be cursed by the disbelievers .
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
what , have they taken for themselves gods other than god ? say : bring your proof on me . i have been sending as a reminder to those who take heed ,
moses prayed , lord , forgive me and my brother and admit us to your mercy , for you are most merciful of the merciful .
to allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth . and if any one is in your heart , he will show you what is in your hearts . he forgives whom he wills and has power over all things .
he said : i am only a messenger of thy lord , that i may bestow on thee a faultless son .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
and made them like an empty field of stalks ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , and lord of the easts .
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
matterfrom us . indeed , we were to send
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
or dost thou ask of themany tribute ? but the recompense of thy lord is better , and he is the best of providers .
and in it there will be for them , in the fire , to dwell therein ; therein they shall be abiders .
and i swear by the self-reproaching soul .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
these will be given their reward twice over because they are steadfast , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have given them .
there is not a township but we shall destroy it before the day of resurrection , or punish it with a severe punishment . that is in the book inscribed .
anda'ad and thamud , and the dwellers in ar-rass , and many generations in between .
they said : our lord ! place a word between us and the people of the calf , so we made them mention of the people of the qur'an : verily , in this there is a sign for people who have done evil .
and they used to persist in the great sin .
said , lord , i have power over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people .
and we did not create thembodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
and the day when he will gather them , and say : what is the matter with the people ? what was the matter with me ? so what sort of discourse do you know ?
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a balance between the two ;
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for any sustenance . it is we who give you sustenance , and theend is for guarding .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
for the day of judgement .
the two groups of the two groups were also shown to you , some of the other people for the cause of god . some of them have the faith in the way of god . some of them do so for their own good . god does not want to take the hearts of those who are uncertain .
it is he who originates creation , then brings it back again , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
and we have spread out the earth , how excellent spreaderare we !
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power over the grace of allah , and that the bounty is in allah 's hand ; he bestows it on whomsoever he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and by oath of the promised day .
and he sought among the birds and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
then gathered he and summoned
and certainly , you will not seek to do something , nor can they question you . but they will surely be called to account , but they have no faith in the truth . but if they turn away , then they will not be sorry , and allah will punish them in the matter .
and by oath of the soul and by oath of him who made it proper .
so he emerged before his people from the temple , and signalled to them that they should glorifymorning and evening .
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
but when allah had decided to do so , they will surely have fear in the earth , o people , but you will be repaid by the means of the life of the world . then you will be brought back to life for all your deeds .
until , when gog and magog are let loose , and they slide down out of every slope ,
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
he said : my lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
this is hell which you were promised .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah do all things return .
they said , “ call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . indeed , cows look alike to us ; and if allah wills , we will be guided . ”
allah it is who hath created seven heavens in harmony , and allah 's command , and the command of allah , in order that they may be of the land , and may know that allah hath power over all things .
and if we willed , we could have quenched their eyes so they would rush towards the path , but how could they have seen ?
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we gave them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes forth from it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
so we brought forth such believers as were in it ,
said zachariah , 'lord , appoint for me a similitude . ' said he , 'is the source of the command of god , to the exclusion of the people ' he said , 'follow your lord , and celebrate the praises of your lord in the early morning . '
worship none but allah , and his offspring , and the needy and the traveller , and the relatives , the near of kin ; and the kindred , in truth , are near . allah does not love the extravagant .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
but if the words of allah is better for you , it may be that allah is the best of those who are good for you , so accept the faith of allah , and be careful ofallah , or the women of the polytheists .
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you unexpectedly or manifestly , will any be destroyed but the harmdoing nation '
and the record of every person is in accordance with his own deeds ; and the guilty shall say , “ woe to us – we must be responsible for it ; and the qur ’ an is proper for them , so the lord does not oppress anyone .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
thisis a clear statement tothe people and a guidance and instruction for those conscious of allah .
we sent forth noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them were rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land . could they find any asylum ?
allah ’ s precedent with those who passed away before , and you will never find any change in allah ’ s precedent .
concerning the guilty :
we would certainly have been servants of allah , sincere !
as for those who disbelieve , it is the same to them whether you warn them or do not warn them , they will not believe .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
some of them believed in it and some held back from it . hell suffices for a blaze .
when their messengers came to them from before them and behind them , saying , do not worship any one but god . they said , if our lord had pleased he would have sent down angels . we are indeed going to believe in your message .
and confirms the best promise ,
upon thy heart , that thou mayest be of the warners ,
he will leave them as plains smooth and level ;
those who pledge allegiance to you are pledging allegiance to god . the hand of god is over their hands . whoever fulfills his pledge to god will have a great reward . god will grant him a great reward .
and soon will thy guardian-lord give theethou shalt be well-pleased .
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
then separate them one from another ,
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
and a sign for them is that we carried their forefathers in the laden ship .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain for you thereby , and subjected for you the ships in order to sail through the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
on that day no intercession will avail , except from him whom the all-beneficent allows and approves of his word .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
so whoever does righteous deeds while he is a believer , there will be no denial of his endeavour , and we are congnisant of it .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink and be not extravagant ; surely he does not love the extravagant .
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
if you follow the majority of people on the earth , they will lead you astray from god 's way . they follow nothing but conjecture and conjecture .
have you not regarded those who claim purity for themselves ? rather , allah purifies whom he wills and they will not be wronged a whit .
though they will be within sight of one another . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
and to make a light to you through the tongue of islamic monotheism and hearts , and give up to you a place of safety . then , it is open to you , so that you will be able to see them .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
and we have indeed been in a company from among them , who say : serve allah , and keep your duty to him , and fear him ; then see what wise hath been the end of the beliers .
he then sneaked upon their deities and said , “ do you not eat ? ”
i am commanded to worship the lord of this city , who made it sacred , and to whomall things ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
and whoever does not respond to allah ’ s summoner , he can not frustrate him in the earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
in what discourse after this will they believe ?
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who stood aloof , “ o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the disbelievers . ”
you will surely ride from stage to stage .
and when you are told at the mention of the fire , it is near at their marks . , it is true , , in the case of this book , it is true . , it will be said to them , “ if you have finished the matter , it is true ; and god is all-hearing , all-knowing . ”
shall each soul know what it hath sent forward andkept back .
samood rejected the warning .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , “ the windfalls are for god and the messenger . so fear god , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ”
and that which you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , does not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakah , seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who will be given a manifold increase .
so he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him ; surely they were a transgressing people .
and let not those grieve you who vie with one another in denying the truth ; they can not harm god in the least ; god desires not to appoint them a portion in the hereafter ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
allah will not take you to task for a slip in your oaths ; but he will take you to task for that which is intended in your hearts ; and allah is forgiving , forbearing .
and if they belie thee , then a party of the followers of the right will be shown unto thee . say thou : there will be no fear with me , nor will ye be able to dispute with me .
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
so that there may not be for him a pair of the two sun , so that the two sun may come upon it . and whoever does not give the day of resurrection , let it be in the hearts of the day of resurrection , and that it is in the same way for those who are certainin pain .
it is god who is the only lord . he is the only lord , to be devoted to his own good , and to be devoted to the believers . the final reward is for the pagans .
will ye not then receive admonition ?
he exalted be the majesty of our lord , who has neither taken to himself a wife , nor a son .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens , -
then put him into hell .
we have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps , and made them missiles against the devils , and we have prepared for them the punishment of the blaze .
and why should allah not punish them while they stopfrom al-masjid-al-haram , and they are not its guardians ? only the godwary are its befitting custodians , but most of them do not know .
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a humble fluid .
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both : i hear and see .
and have protected it from every rebellious satan .
but he whose balancewill belight , -
and others from among them who have not yet joined them . he is the mighty , the wise .
said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who will prosper .
the companions of the left
and thosesailing with ease
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
deaf , dumb , and blind , they will not return .
and they say : when is this promiseif ye are truthful ?
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who work righteousness .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
say , god knows all the secrets of the heavens and the earth . he has the knowledge of the heavens and the earth . he is the only guardian of all things .
enjoin ye righteousness upon mankind , and forgetyourselves , and yet ye study the scripture ? have ye no sense ?
and made therein mountains standing firm , lofty , and given you to drink sweet water ?
and we created you in pairs ,
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , seeing i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
if they argue with you , tell them : god knows best what you do .
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and the curse will be upon them , and they will have the most evil abode .
what led you into the scorching fire ?
say : tell me , if allah were to make the night perpetual over you till the day of resurrection , what other god besides allah can bring you light ? will you not then hear ?
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
those are they of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words concerning themselves .
and they will have no auliya'to help them other than allah . and whoever allah sends astray - for him there is no way .
it is god who is the only lord . he is the only lord , to be devoted to his own good , and to be devoted to the believers . the final reward is for the pagans .
then , o dear prophet , after this , the day of judgment will be made public , and the matter is in truth . they have said , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a thing which is indeed allah ’ s precedent , and say , ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a certain thing . ’
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah turns clemently to whomever he wishes , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
they have made their oaths a shield , and barfrom the way of allah , so there is a humiliating punishment for them .
they said , “ have you come to us in order that we worship allah alone and abandon what our ancestors used to worship ? then bring us what you threaten us with , if you are truthful . ”
nay ! obey him not , and fall prostrate and draw nigh .
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
and when the caravan departed , their father said , “ i sense the scent of joseph , unless you think i am senile . ”
we have spread out the earth , and set upon it firm mountains and caused everything to grow in due proportion .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
ta sin mim .
then i seized those who disbelieved—so how was my rejection ?
or like a rainstorm from the sky , in which is darkness , and thunder , and lightning . they put their fingers in their ears against the thunderclaps , fearful of death ; and allah besieges the faithless .
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the sustainer .
would you question your messenger as moses was questioned formerly ? whoever changes faith for disbelief has strayed from the right path .
but those who cry lies to him -- so they cried lies , and they said : we have heard a word . so say , the word is not at the command of god . so say : 'no , god has no authority . ' no , they are rightly guided .
and on them , and on the ships , you are transported .
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
the day that you will see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will discharge her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's chastisement is terrible .
and obey allah and the apostle so that you may be grantedmercy .
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
then , as for those who are guided , we shall be placed in charge of god . the people of the truth can say to the others , have many a different understanding in the past . it has become clear to those who have firm faith .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and one of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth , and he is a liar .
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
then he produced for them a calf—abody with a low—and they said : this is your god and the god of moses , so he forgot .
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and man says : what is the matter with it ?
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector - an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but the word from me shall come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
among them are those who listen to you , but when they leave your presence , they say to those given knowledge , “ what did he say just now ? ” those are they whose hearts god has sealed , and they follow their own desires .
it will be a source of bitter regret for the unbelievers .
this is nothing else but a reminder to all the worlds ,
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
if two men among you commit it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
they used to hew dwellings in the mountains , feeling secure .
those who do good deeds only to be seen ,
we have bestowed our favour on you before this
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent downtranquility upon them and rewarded them with a victory near at hand
they said : have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our fathers following , so that the two of you might become supreme in the land ? we shall never believe in you .
and that which she used to worship besides allah has prevented her , for she was of a disbelieving people .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not act aright .
they will say , ‘ to allah. ’ say , ‘ will you not then be wary ? ’
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
send the israelites with us .
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
the likeness of those who have made the covenant , that they may follow it , then i was a solid of the seed , and then was made a painting of the parable of those who deny the signs of allah . what a foul guide and a lesson !
they said : we miss the king 's cup ; and for him who bringeth it shall be a camel-load ; and thereof i am a guarantor .
they say , “ god has forged the falsehoods of god . if he wills , he will bring us a book ; and god desires to destroy the hearts of his prayers ; surely god knows the thoughts within the hearts . ”
by thosethat pluck out the soul from depths ,
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
among the people of moses is a nation who guideby the truth and do justice thereby .
say , “ is it a thing , or a true guide from the truth , say , ‘ allah guides the truth to the truth ? so what is it , if you should be one of the truthful ? – so what is the matter with the truth , except the advice ? ! ’
but the word is revealed to him . no word is revealed to him . it is only he who calls us . it is the command of him . say : 'you are witness to what we have submitted .
and we did not create thembodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
at daybreak they called out to one another :
he thought and analyzed .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least , and for them is a painful punishment .
those who believe and do good works , god will give them the good news of his grace , and bounty for them . god will grant them a terrible punishment , but they will not find any protector or helper .
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
and we made a portion of what allah has created of property and of the fruits , and they said : “ this is allah ’ s behalf who are the most merciful . so he who fabricates a lie against allah – so what an evil judgement they impose !
nay , but they play in doubt .
and at night . do you not understand ?
and if the signs of our verses are recited to them , they say : “ this is a just sorcery , and say , ‘ this is just a manifest thing . ’ and those who disbelieve say , ‘ this is a clear magic ! ’
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god besides him ; otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would assuredly have overcome others . glory be to god , above that they describe !
say : allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but again you ascribe partners .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
to show me the treasures of god . i speak the words of god . i speak the words of god . he is the best knower of what is in their hearts . god is well aware of what is in their hearts .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whom he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , then all that they used to do would have gone to waste .
and those who disbelieve would almost make you slip with their eyes when they hear the reminder , and they say : surely he is mad .
then we shall deliver our messengers and those who believe . thus , it is a must for us to deliver the believers .
he said , ‘ i swear by allah ! indeed , he has forged that which you wished to be one of the other . rather , it is a thing to which you could be one of the other . but the most of them do not have any faith in it , except for the good things of his lord . then , they gave the lie to his lord , and then they will be asked for the right forgiveness .
surely thy lord , he is the all-mighty , the all-compassionate .
this is the result of your deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
it is only shaitanthat suggests to you the fear of his friends , so fear them not , but fear me , if you arebelievers .
and remember our servants abraham , isaac , and jacob , men of power and insight .
in which he will neither die nor live therein .
and if you fear , thenon foot or riding ; and when you are safe , then remember allah , as he taught you what you did not know .
does man think that we shall not assemble his bones ?
but god bears witness to that which he has revealed to you . he has sent it down with his knowledge and the angels bear witness . god is witness .
he only commandeth you to evil and indecency , and that ye should say against allah that which ye know not
so be wary of allah and obey me .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
so fight in the way of allah , you are responsible only for yourself . and rouse the believers . perhaps allah will restrain the might of those who disbelieve . allah is stronger in might and stronger in punishment .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and certainly we sent nuh to his people : verily , i am a plain warner to you .
they ask , when is the day of recompense ?
if they could find a shelter or caverns , or any place to creep into , they would turn stampeding to it .
on the day when the earth will be changed into another earth , and the heavens , and they will come forth before allah , the one , the all-paramount
when they came to their own , they begin to understand it , or have the right word in them . let them be a pair of their own laws , without the permission of god . he who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds . anyone who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds .
a fitting recompense .
and we left for him among the later folk :
by the snorting chargers , whose hoofs strike against the rocks
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and will not be removed from it .
it will be but one shout , lo ! they will be staring .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
and whatever good they do , they shall not be denied it , and allah knows the cautious .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us , if you are truthful ?
the truth is from your lord , so be not of those who doubt .
you can not guide whom you please , but god guides whom he wills . he knows best those who are guided .
gardens of eden they shall enter ; therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their apparel therein shall be of silk .
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
whomever god has caused to go astray will find no guardian after him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the torment , saying , is there any way to return ?
the unjust among them changed the words which they had been told . so we sent upon them a punishment from heaven for their wrongdoing .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them , crouching , around hell .
and fight in the watch of the people who call upon the remembrance of their lord and in the morning , and seek to make them like the praises of their lord , and seek to make them the means of the life of the world , so that he may be of the praised .
say : ' o dear prophet , tell me the names of god . ' no word can be given to me . tell them , i have received the fact , but what has been revealed to me . is it not a source of warning for them ?
when there cometh the succour of allah and the victory ,
if you are afflicted by the evil , or in a balance , they will be grieved by it , and if the matter is to be fulfilled , they will be grieved by it . and if you are patient , it will be their due .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who stood aloof , “ o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the disbelievers . ”
permission is given to those who fight because they were wronged , and allah is able to give them victory .
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
with it allah guides those who seek his pleasure to the ways of peace and brings them out from darkness into light by his will , and guides them to a straight path .
put your hand into your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil , among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people . ”
to god belong the angels , in which the human being set out , and his command is to be seen by god 's command . god 's plan is not to be seen of anyone , no one can save them in the least .
and is he on whom you shall be successors in the midst of the gardens and of the watersprings with streams of water flowing beneath you ? in this wise , we have set forth a sign for them ; so this is how allah makes clear to us a sign , so that allah may make clear to him a sign .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our verses .
so let those fight in the way of allah who sell the life of this world for the hereafter ; and whoever fights in the cause of allah , and is killed or conquers , we shall give him a great reward .
and whoever commits a fault or a sin and then blames it on an innocent person , has indeed burdened himself with falsehood and a manifest sin .
they said : we are lords of might and lords of great prowess , but it is for thee to command ; so consider what thou wilt command .
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame upon them .
our lord , you will gather mankind together on a day about which there is no doubt . god never fails to fulfill his promise .
i have taken refuge in my lord and your lord , lest you stone me .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
of him seeksevery creature in the heavens and on earth : every day insplendour doth he !
and of the cattle there are some for burden and some for meat ; eat of what allah has provided you and do not follow in satan ’ s footsteps ; he is indeed your manifest enemy .
on thrones decorated ,
striking sparks of fire ,
andfir'aun , who had pegs ?
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
they said , “ what is the matter with the noble messengers , so what is your opinion regarding the lord of the heavens and the earth ? ” is it the creator of the heavens and the earth ? what is it that you do not have the like of this , and he will forgive you the like for a time ?
'serve you none but god '
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful !
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
and a few from the latter ones .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they will abide . that is the supreme triumph .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
you have fulfilled the vision. ” thus we reward the doers of good .
god has begotten children . they are liars .
then he fashioned him in due proportion , and breathed into him something of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little do you thank .
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : you have tarried according to the decree of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent ! ask him as he is al-khabir .
did you ) not seehow your lord dealt with 'ad ?
but as for him who is given his record in his left hand , he will say , “ i wish i had not been given my record .
your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and they went early in determination , able .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
and when we took a pledge from the mount and the mount and the mount to follow it , and say , ‘ we have indeed been cast on the mount . ’ then , say to them , “ it is just what you used to do . ’
are we then not to die
and multiplied therein corruption .
my lord ! forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house believing , and believing men and believing women , and increase not the wrong-doers in aught save ruin !
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and there is not a thing but itstreasuresare with us ; and we send it down only in precise measure .
and when you are told at the mention of the fire , it is near at their marks . , it is true , , in the case of this book , it is true . , it will be said to them , “ if you have finished the matter , it is true ; and god is all-hearing , all-knowing . ”
and the jews say the christians follow nothing , and the christians say the jews follow nothing ; yet both the followers of the book follow not . even so are the witnesses of the day of resurrection .
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
had the unbelievers fought against you they would have turned their backs . then they would not find any protector or helper .
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you only follow a man who is bewitched . ”
when we recite it , follow its recitation .
and if an evil suggestion comes to you from shaitanthen seek refuge with allah . verily , he is all-hearer , all-knower .
do they not know that god outspreads and straitens his provision to whomsoever he will ? surely in that are signs for a people who believe .
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
so call upon allah , consecrating all your devotion to him , howsoever much the unbelievers may dislike it .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
o you who believe ! do not worship the best of what we have given to you , and have the right course in the earth , and do not be of the skeptics . do not be reluctant in the land . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
and they used to persist in the great sin .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
or have they the treasures of the mercy of your lord , the all-mighty , the real bestower ?
they will hear therein neither gossip , nor lies .
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening .
then we sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years .
he disposed the sun and the moon for you , constant , and he disposed the night and the day ,
on that day they will offer their submission to allah , and what they had invented will abandon them .
and multiplied therein corruption .
taught him the mode of expression .
o you who have faith ! when you be seated to be given to those who are made to enter the same way , they are made to keep the right direction , and if you should be able to keep them away , then you will be able to receive the reward of allah , and if you have done so , then surely allah is aware of what you do .
for what sin she was slain ,
when he came to it , a voice called out : moses !
if allah helps you , none can overcome you ; and if he forsakes you , who is there who can help you after him ? and upon allah let the believers rely .
we shall show them our signs in the universe and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is a witness over all things ?
and to make a light to you through the tongue of islamic monotheism and hearts , and give up to you a place of safety . then , it is open to you , so that you will be able to see them .
no indeed ; if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock --
and the people of the scripturediffered not to themselves but only one religion ; so the religion became one of them , and if the word of your lord had not been concluded , the matter would have been decided between them ; in this there is a disagreement .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us , if you are truthful ?
this quran guides to the most upright way and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds , that they will have a great reward .
let their words be made public , so give the religion of this world to each other , and make the same for them , in order to be recompensed for what they have earned ; and in the end they shall not be recompensed for the least , except allah , to whom he will be rewarded .
and do not call upon those who are recited to you , but they do not fear allah in any way , and they will be unable to do so . thus , then , to their lord will they be returned .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , then inform them of what they did . allah has kept account of it while they forgot it . and allah is witness over all things .
and indeed , we are able to show you what we promise them .
and where will you be afflicted by death , and what is the matter with you , if you should say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest proof from allah ? ’
have they not seen that we have made a sanctuary secure , while all around them people are snatched away ? do they believe in falsehood and disbelieve in the favor of allah ?
say : who is lord of the seven heavens and lord of the mighty throne ?
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
o you who have wrapped up in your garments !
and if they turn away , then indeed , we have given you , , from among them , to hear . but you are only a communicate , and the duty of the devil is only to be seen . indeed , the word of allah is a decree .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be received therein with greetings andpeace .
noble scribes
is the one who knows all that is in the hands of their own book ? they have set different groups with god . say , “ bring it upon those who have rejected the truth , and say , “ bring it upon those who are bent on denying the truth . god has the knowledge of the disbelievers . ”
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so get away from me for a while . ”
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what ismost gracious ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which thou commandest us ? and it increases them in aversion .
but we desired to favour those who were oppressed in the land , and to make them leaders and to make them the inheritors ,
and fear allah , and humiliate me not .
so be patient , , with the word of god , and sing the praise of your lord before the rising of the sun and the moon , and sing the praises of your lord , in order that you may be devoted .
do they , then , take to themselves a share of the same time or if they meet you , or have they become subject to it ? say , do you wish to be hastened ?
he said : by no means . go with our signs , both of you . we shall be with you , listening .
those who believed , and used to fear allah much .
he is the conqueror over his servants . he sends guardians over you until , when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they do not neglect .
it shall claim him who turned and fled ,
the pharaoh said , you believed in me before i have given you permission . he is your chief who has taught you sorcery . but you will soon know .
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
and allah has created you and what you make ?
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whom he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , then all that they used to do would have gone to waste .
it is they who say : “ give nothing to those who are with the messenger of allah so that they may disperse. ” to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
or the giving of food in a day of hunger
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering upon them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is forgiving and merciful .
he does not fear the consequence .
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
and he turned away from them and said : alas for joseph ! his eyes turned white with grief , and he choked with suppressed agony .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
lord , we have heard a caller calling to the faith saying , believe in your lord . we have believed in him . our lord , forgive us our sins and remove from us our bad deeds and make us die with the pious ones .
but when they measure or weigh for them , give less .
and they went early in determination , able .
did you think that we had created you in jest , and that you would not be brought back to us ?
by the much-frequented house ,
and in them are numerous benefits for you , and that you may through them attain a need in your chests , and upon them and upon ships you are carried .
and be not like those who came forth from their homes boastfully and to be seen of men , and debarfrom the way of allah , and allah encompasses what they do .
and they say , “ submit , ” and when you have been sent forth , they say , “ our prayer is just at night ; a group of the matters you are at night ; so pay the attention of your deeds , and pay attention to god ; so do thou trust in god .
god has decided to be hesitant of your lord 's messenger . you will not be able to receive his responsibility on account of the grain which he has given you . god has power over all things . he has power over all things .
he said , “ do you indeed believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , this was the case of moosa , and i swear by the hand of it , so that you shall know the very end !
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase their sins , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
have they not pondered the saying , or has there come to them that which had not come to their forefathers ?
then he drew near , and came down
he said , do not take me to task for what i forgot , and do not be hard on me .
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
therefore your lord struck them hard with the means of punishment .
this is indeed the supreme triumph ! ’
thus do we expound the signs that the way of the unrighteous may be manifest .
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
cleaving , as one , the centre ,
he knows what is before them and what is behind them , and to allah do all things return .
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
he said , ‘ get down , both of you , from here , as enemies to one another . then if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance will not go astray , nor will he be unhappy .
exalted in rank , lord of the throne : he directs the inspiration by his command to any of his servants he pleases , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
say , the truth is that we have revealed to abraham and ishmael and isaac , and jacob , and the prophets , and the prophets , from their lord , and the prophets , and the messengers , both of them , to submit ,
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it sendeth forward for the morrow . and fear allah : for allah is well-acquainted withthat ye do .
we mislead you and we ourselves had also gone astray .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
say : to allah belongs all intercession . his is the dominion of the heavens and the earth . then to him you will be returned .
and wait ! lo ! weare waiting .
praise be to god who has given me ishmael and isaac in my old age . surely my lord hears all supplications .
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
such is allah , your lord ; there is no god but he , the creator of all things , so worship him . and he is the wakilover all things .
and in the morning it was as if plucked .
and it was revealed unto nuh : verily none of thy people will believe save those who have believed already . so be not distressed because of what they used to do .
on the day when every soul finds its good guidance , it will see its good and good deeds . the guilty will wish that it had been a great veil among them . god warns you about himself . god is kind towards the servants .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement ?
he will say : ah ! would that i had sent forthformylife !
o believers , eat of the good things wherewith we have provided you , and give thanks to god , if it be him that you serve .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
those who believe say : if a chapter is sent down , then when a categorical surah is revealed that mentions war , you should see those in whose hearts is sickness looking at you like one who swoons at death .
and will abide under this burden for ever . evil will be their burden on the day of resurrection .
he said : know ye what ye did with joseph and his brother , when ye were ignorant ?
so tread thou the straight path as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not . lo ! he is seer of what ye do .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
they will say : nay ! you ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
ha mim .
or enjoins piety ?
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the tongue of him to whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech clear .
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you should be truthful .
then seest thou any of them left surviving ?
those who have despaired of the truth will be in speech . if they have any patience , they will have no one to be seen about it . they have the power to do so . this is the law of the law of the past .
there is no blame on the prophet regarding what allah has ordained for him . such has been allah 's way with those who passed away before . and the command of allah is a decree determined .
and on the earth are signs for the convinced .
as for he who has been sent as a clear sign from his lord , has made clear to him the book of god , who has received guidance from his lord , so that the people will not believe in it . this is the word of your lord , but most people do not believe .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and when he turns away , he strives in the land that he may cause mischief in it and destroy the tilth and the stock , and allah does not like mischief .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
i swear by the lord of the easts and the wests that we have the power
for every nation there is a direction to which they face . so race togood . wherever you may be , god will bring you all together . god has power over all things .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
from the evil of the sneaky whisperer .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they only lead themselves astray , and they do not realize it .
thisis a clear statement tothe people and a guidance and instruction for those conscious of allah .
and whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul , then seeketh pardon of allah , will find allah forgiving , merciful .
had there been a guidance for the people before you had come to them , they just had the same chance for them to be true . they have the right to do so . they have the right to do so . god is fully aware of what they do .
“ those whose efforts in this world are misguided , while they assume that they are doing good deeds . ”
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
their prayer at the house was nothing but whistling and clapping—so taste the punishment for your blasphemy .
for use and convenience to you and your cattle .
the believers are only those who believe in allah and his apostle and then doubt not , and strive with their wealth and their lives for the cause of allah . these ! they are the truthful .
the words of god is true . you can see the prayers of the day of judgment . the judgement is only with god . the matter is a decree for the disbelievers . this is the law of god . what is the matter with the unbelievers ? god has the power to do so .
it is he who has made the earth for you as a dwelling , and made for you the like of it . it is the like of the heavens and the earth . it is the same for you , so that you may worship god alone .
their deception will not avail them at all , nor will they be helped .
but pharaoh disobeyed the messenger , so we seized him with a terrible seizing .
accursed be the conjecturers
and none but allah can avert it .
invent not similitudes for allah : for allah knoweth , and ye know not .
allah is the creator of all things , and he is the wakilover all things .
tell my servants who believe to establish prayer and spend out of what we have given them secretly and openly , before the coming of the day in which there is neither trading nor friendship .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those who were before you , so that you may be godwary .
he said , ‘ my lord ! as you have blessed me , i will never be a supporter of the guilty . ’
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
he is only a man who invents lies against god , and we are not going to believe in him .
only those who listen will respond . as for the dead , god will raise them up , then to him they will be returned .
such is the punishment ; and the punishment of the hereafter is greater , if they only knew .
we have tried them as we tried the owners of the garden , when they swore to pluck the fruits of the garden in the morning ,
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents parables to the people that perhaps they will take heed .
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when hosts came against you , and we sent against them a wind and hosts which ye saw not . and allah is ever seer of what ye do .
o you who believe ! do not worship the best of what we have given to you , and have the right course in the earth , and do not be of the skeptics . do not be reluctant in the land . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knower .
it is he who has sent to the illiterate a messenger from among themselves , who recites his revelations to them and purifies them , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , although before that they were clearly in error .
and on the day of resurrection you will see those who lied against allah with their faces blackened . is not the home of the scorners in hell ?
and by the night when it departeth ,
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful !
and they worship beside allah that for which he hath sent down no authority , and that whereof they have no knowledge ; and for the wrong-doers there shall be no helper .
because he has wealth and sons .
with those who were made to say , we nazarenes a covenant , but they have forgotten much of what they were reminded . so we make them taste the day of remorse , and god will inform them of all that they have done .
woe to thee , , yea , woe !
this is a chapter which we have revealed , and made obligatory , and we have sent down clear verses in it , that haply you will remember .
no indeed ; if he does not desist , we will drag him by the forelock --
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
to send down upon them stones of baked clay .
he said , “ if god were to extend any one of you , then do you deny the others with whom you are ruined ? you are not at all as a sign for your forefathers ; and you are waiting with god . ”
and they will call , o malik , let your lord make an end of us . he will say , indeed , you will remain .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
and also in your own selves . do you not see ?
but he turned away with his court , and said : a magician or a madman .
we loosed against them a wind clamorous in a day of ill fortune continuous ,
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
and then the promised punishment fell upon them ,
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you only follow a man who is bewitched . ”
or , who is it that there is no other god besides him ? when he calls upon them , he will say to them : what ! do you then deny the truth ?
and by the winds that blow violently ,
the words of god and his messenger is for the people of the day . god and his messenger are free from all the same . if you are bent on denying the truth , the day of judgment will certainly be better for you . but if you should turn away , then know that you will not be able to escape from god .
say : 'allah has spoken the truth ; follow the creed of abraham , a man of pure faith and no idolater . '
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
it was revealed to you and to those before you that if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will surely come to nothing and you will certainly be among the losers .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we will raise him on the day of resurrection blind . ”
we have spread out the earth , and set upon it firm mountains and caused everything to grow in due proportion .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him therein what we will for whom we please . then we have appointed for him hell , he shall enter it despised , driven away .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise a cloud , then we drive it towards a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise is the resurrection .
and indeed he is ardent for the love of good .
o you who believe ! among your wives and your children are enemies to you , so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
so let not such as believe not therein but follow their own lusts , divert thee therefrom , lest thou perish .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
when the earth will suddenly shake with a terrible shaking ,
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
o you who have believed , the word has come to you true , the morning , the day , the sun ’ s term . after the time of the day when the sun will come to you , a group of the day after which you have no power . thus does allah clarify his signs for you . and allah is knowing and wise .
say : o mankind ! indeed i am a messenger of allah unto you , and unto you is the dominion of the heavens and the earth : there is no god but he , the lord of the worlds ; so follow him , and that ye may follow the right way :
and when the believers saw the confederates , they said : this is what allah and his apostle had promised us , and allah and his apostle spoke the truth . and it only increased them in faith and submission .
he surely thought he would never return .
and he swore to them , “ indeed i am a well-wisher for both of you . ”
and they will say , we believe in it . but how could they receivefrom a place so far off .
the building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in their hearts unless their hearts are stopped . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and allah ’ s noble messenger and his noble messenger are just upon the tongue ; and if they do so , then be united , and then they will be made to remain in it ; and indeed allah ’ s hold is with the entire .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a small price ; and fear me alone .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to stumble in it , and said : go down , being enemies of one another ! and on earth shall be your abode and your provision for a time .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
have they taken protectorsbesides him ? but allah , he is the protector , and he quickeneth the dead , and he is over everything potent .
it is a written record .
for those who have been given knowledge of this book , know that this quran is a revelation from the lord of the universe , and that it is the truth from the lord of the universe . god is a guide to the believers .
and composed you in any form that he wished ?
, eat of the good things we have provided for you , but do not transgress lest my wrath should descend upon you . he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen .
it is we who bring the dead to life and write down what they have forwarded and what they leave behind . we have recorded everything in a clear book .
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
and made several preparations for him .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
do they not see that we have created for them of what our hands have created , so that they are their owners .
worship none but allah , and his offspring , and the needy and the traveller , and the relatives , the near of kin ; and the kindred , in truth , are near . allah does not love the extravagant .
for over my servants no authority shalt thou have , except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow thee .
they will swear to you by god , when you return to them , that you may leave them alone . so leave them alone . they are unclean , and hell will be their home as a reward for their deeds .
shall man have whatever he yearns for ?
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
have the people of faith in the faith of allah , their wishful belief , so that they may follow the religion of allah on account of the day of judgment , as the means of allah , to remain in it , as a result of their deeds , and many of them became transgressors ?
there is no one comparable to him .
and indeed in the cattle is a lesson for you ; we give you to drink from what is in their bellies , and there are many benefits for you in them , and of them you eat .
and he had recited it to them , they would not have believed in it .
and the word is revealed to you . so , you are to be brought to account in the presence of what the committed committed before . said to them , ‘ o my people ! be wary of allah , so do you have a reason ! ’
to bring each knowing wizard unto thee .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor give bribery to the rulersthat you may knowingly eat up a portion of the property of others sinfully .
these are verses of the wise book .
'begone ' said he , 'despised and outcast.those of them that follow you , i shall fill gehennawith all of you '
then , as for the example of an ill-deed , the like of it is like a spring . among them are some that are made to flow on the earth . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
a fitting recompense .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and of those before them . they disbelieved in the signs of allah and so allah seized them for their sins . indeed , allah is powerful and severe in penalty .
it is allah who made for you the night that you may rest therein and the day to see . indeed allah is gracious to mankind , but most people do not give thanks .
the evildoers shall have their portion , like the portion of their fellows ; so let them not ask me to hasten on .
when the wife of 'imran said , “ my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your exclusive service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ”
how will it be when we gather them together on a day about which there is no doubt , and each soul will be paid in full what it has earned , and they will not be wronged ?
when the unbelievers plotted against you to take you captive , or kill you , or expel you . they plotted and god was devising . god is the best of planners .
indeed , we sent down to you the book for mankind with the truth . so whoever is guided is guided only for himself , and he who goes astray , goes astray to his own detriment , and you are not their overseer .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
and paradise will be brought near to the righteous , not far ,
there areothers , held in suspense for the command of allah , whether he will punish them , or accept their repentance . and allah is knowing , wise .
so verily , i swear by the planets that recede .
and we have brought to them a book which we have elaborated with knowledge , and guidance and mercy for a people who believe .
it is the sameconcerning you whether one concealsspeech or one publicizes it , and whether one is hidden by night or conspicuousby day .
and thus have we sent it down as evidences , and indeed allah guides whomever he wills .
so when the stars are obliterated
and then , when he wished , resurrected him .
and those who answer their lord , establish the prayer , and their affairs are by consultation ; and they spend out of what we have provided them .
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
the thamud and 'ad denied the consequential calamity .
as for the likeness of those who were before you , they were like unto you , in fact , in which ye were incapable of power , and in which ye were wont to give up , for even as they were in your own way , as though ye were admonished . and it is they who are the ones who are wont to do a thing .
so the end of both will be that they will be in the fire , to remain in it forever ; and this is the requital of the unjust .
on the day they meet him , they will be welcomed with the greeting , peace . and he has prepared for them a generous reward .
indeed , those who have purchased their slander among the signs of their own , have been virtuous to you . the reward of those who have been given the great sin will have a great punishment .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
until , when the messengers came to the adversity , they have been called a lie . in that case , we shall give the lie to the truth , and then we shall have none to protect our signs .
and they believed , so we gave them enjoyment for a while .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
so the angels fell prostrate , all of them together
o believers , be steadfast in god and his messenger , and and this book , and the prophet in the time of which he was sent down . and whosoever believes in god and his messenger , and the last day , he is certainly astray .
and we had certainly given moses guidance , and we made the children of israel inherit the book .
o my two fellow-prisoners ! are many diverse lords better , or god , the one , the almighty ?
they said : o our people ! we have heard a book revealed after moses , confirming what was before it , guiding to the truth and to a straight path .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
and when the caravan departed , their father said , “ i sense the scent of joseph , unless you think i am senile . ”
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
so fear allah and obey me .
and that allah may purify the believersand destroy the disbelievers .
the remembrance of your lord will be fulfilled , and your lord has said , “ do you not see ? ” he said , “ we were not unjust , so that you were unaware . ”
say , if there were other gods with him , as they say , they would have sought a way to the lord of the throne .
these are they who are the heirs ,
and when the anger of musawas appeased , he took up the tablets , and in their inscription was guidance and mercy for those who fear their lord .
verily , we sent nuhto his people : warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment .
when they came upon you from above you and from below you , and when the eyes rolledand the hearts leapt to the throats , and you harbored doubts about allah .
god created every creature from water . some of them go on their bellies , and some of them go on two legs , and others walk on four . god creates whatever he wills . god has power over all things .
so invoke not with allah another ilahlest you be among those who receive punishment .
when it is said to them , 'do not corrupt in the land , ' they reply , 'we are only reformers . '
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
say : it is he who created you , and made for you hearing , eyesight , and hearts . little thanks it is ye give .
for me , i intend to let thee draw on thyself my sin as well as thine , for thou wilt be among the companions of the fire ; that is the meed of the wrong-doers .
yet lasting is the majestic and munificent face of your lord .
and the sky will be rent asunder , for on that day it will be unstable .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it trembles ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
when we bestow favours upon man , he arrogantly turns away and draws aside ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
and do not be inspired in the truth , except that you follow the religion of allah , and say , ‘ indeed it is the guidance of allah , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah . ’ say , ‘ indeed , it is the guidance of allah , and in order that he may unite those who are grateful . ’
with your lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on the day .
they will have sheets of fire above them and sheets of fire . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
so we restored him to his mother , that she might be comforted and not grieve , and that she might know that the promise of allah is true . but most of them do not know .
, we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger , will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he made it a perfect voice , and he made a proclamation to him ? and if thou callest them to the guidance , then they will not have faith .
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
it is the true word ; the book of god is true ; so the word of god has been cried out to him ; and he made it a promise to the hearts of your heart , and he made them forget your heart .
he will say , ‘ by allah , you had almost ruined me !
or like he who came to the right direction in the course of its sway and said : what is it that shall be the ? he will say , ‘ shall allah revive the dead ? he said , ‘ by no means ! maybe he will be dead . ’ ‘ this is a clear prophesy . ’
that is their goal of knowledge . surely your lord knows best him who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
as for those who have faith and do righteous deeds , they will have the gardens of paradise as a lodging ,
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
and among us are the righteous , and among us arenot so ; we weredivided ways .
so eat and drink and be consoled . and if thou shouldst see any mortal , say : lo ! i have vowed a fast unto the beneficent , and so i shall not speak to any man today .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
who creates , then makes complete ,
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
when you travel in the land , there is no blame on you for shortening the prayers , if you fear that the unbelievers may trouble you . the unbelievers are indeed your manifest enemies .
and when it was said , “ the promise of allah is true , and the hour of doom there is no doubt , ” you said , “ we do not know what the hour is ; we are only suspicious . ”
so that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may incline to it and be pleased with it , and that they may earn what they are gaining .
we had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
is he who will shield himself with his face from the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection ? it will be said to the wrong-doers , taste what you used to earn .
except for a proclamation from allah and his messages . he who disobeys allah and his messenger will be in the fire of hell , to dwell therein for a long time .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not act aright .
if they had so willed , they would have deserved the case of the people . they will be brought by the people of paradise to be given a share of the truth . if they do so , we shall certainly have no share of it .
and when he learns something of our revelations , he derides them : for such there will be a humiliating torment .
and what harm would it have done them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has given them ? allah knows them well .
none dispute concerning the revelations of allah save those who disbelieve , so let not their going to and fro in the cities deceive thee .
and when the qur'an is recited to them they do not bow ?
these , they said , are only a small band ,
and we have made the shades of peace and mercy , until the night comes to pass , saying : 'the night of allah , is a witness . ' and he will be among the faithful .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears might remember it .
then we would have made you taste a doublein this life and a doubleafter death , and then you would have found none to help you against us .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
what they concealed before hasappeared to them . and even if they were returned , they would return to what they were forbidden , and they are liars .
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
those who deliver the messages of allah and fear him , and fear none save allah ; and allah sufficeth as a reckoner .
and casts out all that is within and voids itself ,
, tell them , the fire of god is true . say , god will give me a double share of hell . it is only a result of the same for those who have faith . if the people of the believing men and the women had also submitted themselves to god , their share will be doubled . god has the knowledge of the two groups .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
they make it a favour to theethat they have surrendered . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will to an exalted rank . your lord is wise and knowing .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will make it dust ; and the promise of my lord is true .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but tales of the ancients . ’
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will exclaim therein for destruction .
o prophet ! say to those captives who are in your hands : if allah knows any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
indeed there was a party of my servants who said , ‘ our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and you are the best of the merciful . ’
but when he gave them a healthy child , they ascribed partners to him in what he had given them . exalted is allah above what they associate with him .
and lot ! when he said unto his folk : lo ! ye commit lewdness such as no creature did before you .
and the trumpet will be blown , and whoever is in the heavens and whoever is on the earth will swoon away , except whomever allah wills ; then it will be blown again , and they will be standing , looking on .
when we said to the angels , ‘ prostrate before adam , ’ they all prostrated themselves except iblis . he said , ‘ shall i prostrate before someone you created from clay ? ’
so give to the kinsman his due , and to the needy , and to the wayfarer . that is best for those who seek allah 's countenance , and it is they who will prosper .
and we did not show them a sign but it was greater than its sister , and we seized them with punishment so that they might return .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
so be patient , then , with the messenger of the messengers , and do not be with the ones who have been given knowledge . the truth is only with the words of wisdom .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
on that day people will proceed separately to be shown their deeds .
to solomon the raging wind ran at his command to the land which we had blessed . we have knowledge of all things .
so , when the unbelievers , when they are bent on denying the truth , they will be driven to them , so that when they were to be reminded by it , the companions of the pharaoh will be struck by the like of them , so they would not have done the like of it , or the people of pharaoh . they will never be punished .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
he who made the earth a habitat for you , and traced in it routes for you ; and sent down water from the sky , with which we bring forth various kinds of vegetation .
and fear him who created you and all the earlier people .
verily in thisis a message for people who wouldworship allah .
he said : do you give me good newswhen old age has overtaken me ? of what then is your news ?
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and they make the jinn associates with allah , while he created them ; and they attribute to him sons and daughters , without any knowledge . glory be to him ! high be he exalted above what they describe !
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , jesus and job , and jonah and aaron and solomon , and we gave to david psalms ,
he said : o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and gave a little , then stopped ?
or show you what we have promised them , for surely we have power over them .
and theright on the high-road .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
some faces on that day shall be beaming with happiness ,
what ! do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ bring us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful ! ’
so do not weaken or grieve , for you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip off the day from it and they are left in darkness .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created anything , and are themselves created .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
it is all the same for them whether you ask forgiveness for them or not . god will not forgive them . god guides not the people of the ungodly .
they will abide therein for ages .
and ward offthe fire prepared for disbelievers .
they plotted against him , but we made them the lowest .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the transgressing people .
the unjust will see that they are made to enter the wrong of their deeds while they are righteously and the righteously striving believers will receive from their lord . this is the greatest victory .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
and on the day when he will assemble them for the day of resurrection , “ on the day of resurrection – so on the day of resurrection he will be a matter upon the day of resurrection ; and whoever believes in allah and does the right – he is the pardoner , the supreme . ”
and the judgement shall surely happen .
and do not give the weak-minded your property , which allah has made a means of support for you , but feed and clothe them from it , and speak to them with kindness .
‘ ad , hud , ’ s brother , hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . indeed , my lord is the most acceptor of repentance . ’
ta sin mim .
the reverent will remember .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
as a blessing from us . thus we reward the thankful .
my people , do according to your position , and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . you are watching .
the pharaoh and his army chased moses and his people but were drowned by the sea .
he will pray for utter destruction
and the mount of sinai ,
and that upon him is the second creation
for the beggar and the deprived .
only they invent falsehood who believe not in the signs of allah , and these ! they are the liars .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
and of some of the wealth are those who are given the property of their hearts , that they shall be made to drink of their houses , and if there be for them a thing of their deeds , my remembrance is indeed ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
then it will be said to those who were unjust , 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! are you recompensed for aught but what you did ? '
so you and your deities
so be wary of allah and obey me .
who is a greater wrongdoer than him who fabricates a lie against allah ? such men will be presented before their lord , and the witnesses will say , ‘ these are they who lied against their lord . unquestionably , the curse of allah is upon the wrongdoers . ’
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
what , have they taken for themselves gods other than god ? say : bring your proof on me . i have been sending as a reminder to those who take heed ,
did you see him who turned away ,
they ask you , when will the hour of doom come ? tell them : the knowledge of the hour is only with my lord , and when the hour has come , it is only to my lord that the hour is coming . but most of them will not be able to say .
they said , ‘ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
and you devour inheritance all with greed ,
yes indeed , his lord had sight of him .
, you were certainly in unmindfulness of this . we have removed from you your cover , so your sight today is sharp .
and on the day when we set the mountains in motion and you see the earth emerging , and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
he said : worship ye then instead of allah that which can not profit you at all , nor harm you ?
assuredly allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that which they proclaim . lo ! he loveth not the proud .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
what is the matter with you that you do not appreciate allah ’ s greatness ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , and lord of the easts .
we have revealed to you as we revealed to noah , and the prophets after him , and we revealed to abraham , ishmael , isaac , jacob , and the tribes , jesus and job , and jonah and aaron and solomon , and we gave to david psalms ,
say : 'he is god , one ,
and be moderatein your walking , and lower your voice . verily , the harshest of all voices is the voiceof the ass .
those are they whom allah hath cursed ; and he whom allah hath cursed , thouwilt find for him no helper .
your people have denied it , though it is the truth . say : ' i am not a guardian over you .
who , out of his bounty , has lodged us in an abode wherein no toil nor weariness affects us .
and whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul , then seeketh pardon of allah , will find allah forgiving , merciful .
will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and conspired to expel the messenger , while they were the first to attack you ? do you fear them ? god has more right that you should fear him , if you are believers .
say thou : he hath sent it down who knoweth the secret of the heavens and the earth . lo ! he is ever forgiving , merciful .
and they assign daughters unto allah ! - glory be to him ! - and for themselvesthey desire !
and there go round them youths , their own , as if they were hidden pearls .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
it is the laws of god . in truth , we speak to you . be loud , then , as to your footsteps , o people of the book , what is the matter with you , o people of understanding ? god 's command is not .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
but those who have been given knowledge and faith will say : you have tarried according to the decree of allah until the day of resurrection . this is the day of resurrection , but you did not know .
so we said , o adam , indeed this is an enemy to you and your wife . so let him not get you both out of paradise , so you should be unhappy .
so . and we knew all about him .
remember allah 's favour upon you and his covenant which he made with you when you said : we hear and we obey . and fear allah . indeed , allah is knowing of that within the breasts .
so eat and drink and be consoled . and if thou shouldst see any mortal , say : lo ! i have vowed a fast unto the beneficent , and so i shall not speak to any man today .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
where they will hear no idle talk ,
flog the fornicatress and the fornicator with a hundred lashes each . let there be no reluctance in enforcing the laws of god , if you believe in god and the last day . let their punishment be witnessed by a party of believers .
kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by injury ; and allah is richand he is most-forbearing .
he said , you are strangers .
and do not invoke any other god along with allah . there is no god but he . all things will perish save his face . his is the judgement , and to him you will be returned .
and strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said , our lord is the lord of the heavens and the earth ; we will not call upon any god besides him , for then we would have spoken an outrage .
i fear for you the punishment of an awesome day . ”
no indeed ! on that day they will be screened off from seeing their lord ,
on that day , none will punish as he punishes .
he who purifies himself ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it still . then we made the sun its pilot ;
cleaving , as one , the centre ,
and among men there is such a one that disputes concerning allah without knowledge and follows every rebellious devil ,
but we are a numerous host , ever on guard .
when jesus came with clear signs , he said , i have come to you with wisdom , and to make clear to you some of the matters in which you differ . fear god , and obey me .
eschew all sin , open or secret : those who commit sin will get due recompense for their earnings .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand , he will say : 'here , take and read my book !
and ask forgiveness of your lord and then return to him for a time . then , when we give good counsel to him , he will give them the good news of a great day .
and the morning as it lights up .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
'you , samaritan ' said he , 'what was your business '
nor are the living and the dead . indeed , allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
he said : nay , this biggest one of them did it . ask them , if they can speak .
say : nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector ; and on allah let the believers rely .
although they were before this—before it was sent down upon them—in despair .
and he who made the earth a restingplace , and made within it rivers , and set mountains for it , and set a barrier between the two seas . is there a god with allah ? nay , but most of them do not know .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it will be but one blast , and they will all be brought before us together .
and they say , “ our hearts are screened from what you call us to , and in our ears is deafness , and between us and you is a veil ; so act ; we are acting . ”
the most gracious , the most merciful .
and if this is in the scripture on the earth , you would not be obedient to the land , but it will be fixed , and the day on which the command will be cut open , and the command on that day will be made clear for the people of this book .
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and the matter of the hour is but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah is over all things competent .
my lord ! grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous ,
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers following . what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
wesaid : fear not ! surely , you will have the upper hand .
to him the angels and the spiritascend in a day , the measure of which is fifty thousand years .
on the day when the hour takes place , the guilty will despair .
then allah will turn clemently after that to whomever he wishes ; and allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
woe to those who write the book with their own hands and then say , this is from allah , to purchase it for a small price . woe to them for what their hands have written and woe to them for what they earn .
and from where he gives you , out of a means , to which he will be given ; and whoever turns away from him , then he is sufficient as a measure . allah is a complete doer of everything .
or have they a share in the kingdom ? then they would not give people a speck .
he knows what penetrates into the earth and what comes forth from it , and what descends from the heaven and what ascends to it . he is the merciful , the forgiving .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth , that he may make it prevail over all religions , however much the polytheists may dislike it .
do you not see how allah has created the seven heavens one above another ,
so today none of you can benefit or harm one another . and we shall say to the wrongdoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ”
say , “ what ! i do not worship god , the lord of all being , the lord of all the worlds ? he does not have any injustice except of his own soul ; then to your lord you will all return . ”
then the messenger of allah said to them : beware of the she-camel of allah and her drink !
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
you will see every nation hobbling on their knees . each nation will be summoned to its book . this day you will be recompensed for what you used to do .
and indeed , the word of moses is true , and in respect of what was spoken to them . in truth , the record of the people of the book are also decided for them . the words of god said to them , do not be impressed by what they say .
o you who have believed , do not hold the people at the sacred mosque , do not be held accountable for the people , but do not be hasty . this is what you have been seeking to do . it is the very best for you to do so . it is not for allah to take your affairs to be excused .
it is he who makes you to die by night , and to what you have gained by day , and then resurrects you so that an ordained term is realized . to him you will return .
whatever thing you have been doing , the words of god is true , and remember god 's blessing , and the blessing that he has bestowed upon you . remember , this is the law of god , so that he may make you clear to the differences , so that god may make clear to you his revelations , so that god may make clear to you his revelations .
we never sent before you any messengers , but the messengers ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you as a trial for others . will you have patience ? your lord is always watching .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path . ”
as for those who reject our signs , we will draw them on little by little whence they know not ;
it is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they are the greatest losers .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
and say , “ my lord , land me with a blessed landing , and you are the best to accommodate . ”
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
i swear by the evening glow ,
he said , “ you will cultivate for seven years continuously ; so leave all that you harvest in the ear , except a little which you eat . ”
except what allah wills . indeed , he knows the open and what is hidden .
by no means ! verily it is a flame .
travailing , worn .
god is the true one . it is no more than a confirmation of his knowledge . but as for those who believe , in the least , it is a clear word of god , whether those who believe , or deny the truth , say : 'allah has caused what is true . but he has no guide .
and the dwellers of the wood , and the people of tubba . they all rejected the messengers , so my threat became due .
and his lord was set in favour of the most honourable lord , so he made them speak to his servant , and he showed them the good news , and said , ‘ mary , it is from allah , to whom he pleases , and he causes the provisions to whom he wills . indeed , allah is ever unaware of what he will .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
we allowed them and their fathers to enjoy life until the time of life became long for them . do they not see how we visit the land diminishing it at its edges ? are they the victors ?
so hallow thou the praise of thy lord , and be thou of the prostrate .
did hechoose daughters rather than sons ?
and if you wish to havewife in place of another and you have given one of them a quintal , do not take back anything from it ; will you take it by slanderingandmanifest wrong ?
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
they will soon come to know the truth of that which they have been scoffing at .
whoever thinks that god will not help him in this world and the hereafter , let him stretch a rope to the ceiling , and let him hang himself and see if his cunning eliminates what enrages him .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
we said , “ o fire , be coolness and safety upon abraham . ”
herein are really signs for those who discern .
the evidence of the book is a clear decree of god . some of them can come to the same time . god has the power to do so . god is self-sufficient and praiseworthy .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not diminish the goods of others , and do not spread corruption in the land .
“ yes , my verses came to you , but you denied them and were proud and you were one of the faithless . ”
we have set forth for people in this koran every manner of similitude ; man is the most disputatious of things .
they will say , to allah . say , then will you not remember ?
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a clear warrant against yourselves ?
indeed , your lord is the best knower of two periods of the two part of the night or the night , or point on the part of the night . it is the difference of the night and the day . it is the tradition of god to make you the night and the day as a result of the law of the night . god is the most forgiving and the most merciful .
so when he had left them and those they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
then their return will be to the same blazing hell .
verily he who hath imposed the qur'an upon thee , will bring thee back to the place of return . say : my lord knoweth best who bringeth guidance and who is in manifest error .
and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy upon you , they would not have been able to say . indeed , it was they who have no knowledge of it . and allah is the exalted in might , the owner of bounties .
save him who hath done wrong and afterward hath changed evil for good . lo ! i am forgiving , merciful .
o you who believe ! be patient , and advocate patience , and be united , and revere allah , so that you may succeed .
this is the book in which there is no doubt , a guidance for the pious .
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what was not that their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
and he who disobeys allah and his messenger and transgresses his limits , he will admit him into a fire , to abide therein , and he shall have a humiliating punishment .
when you said to the believers : does it not suffice that your lord helps you by sending down three thousand angels ?
indeed , those who have believed and migrated and strove for the cause of allah with their own wealth and their lives - those are they who have made their allies in the way of allah . those who have emigrated and made their allies in the way of allah , they are indeed the ones who have no faith in you . allah is the seer of what you do .
they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever as a reward for their deeds .
have they not travelled in the land , so that behold how was the end of them that were the people of the world ? how terrible was their end in the heavens and the earth : for he is full of knowledge and wisdom .
is it not that whenever they make a covenant , some of them toss it aside ? in fact , most of them do not believe .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
he said : they are following in my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
but if they do not respond to you , then know that it is revealed with the knowledge of allah and that there is no god but he . will you then submit ?
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
gehennais before him and he is given oozing pus to drink ,
nor do you worship what i worship .
we have sent you forth as a bearer of glad news and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
and then severed his life-artery ,
they see it to be far off ,
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he ; so take him for your trustee ,
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
by no means ! anon they shall know .
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , even though you were unaware before it .
this is a proclamation for mankind , that they may be warned thereby , and know that he is one god , and that men of understanding may remember .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
he will say , ‘ the course of a book is set up . indeed , he will make it a spring . and he who is given the book will be given to it by his command . and the command of allah is only with the hands of those who have faith . they are the ones who have been patient . ’
and those who join what allah has commanded to be joined , and fear their lord , and are afraid of the evil ofaccount ,
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for any sustenance . it is we who give you sustenance , and theend is for guarding .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything ; you are only in great error . '
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they lied .
he calls besides allah unto that which hurts him not , nor profits him . that is the far error .
he said to the angels , “ i am in the earth , a sign . the angels say , ‘ is there a sign for you in this matter ? ’ ‘ and what is the matter with the guilty ? indeed , we will inform you about what you do not know . ’
nay , but we are desolate !
peace , a word from a merciful lord .
it is allah who has sent down the book with the truth and the balance . and what will make you realize that perhaps the hour is near ?
he said , “ do you indeed believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , this was the case of moosa , and i swear by the hand of it , so that you shall know the very end !
they said , “ put him off , and his brother , and send heralds to the cities . ”
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would be nothing but the wares of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is only for the godwary .
what are they asking one another about ?
as for those who are wary of their lord , for them will be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever , a hospitality from god ; that which is with god is better for the pious .
it is a tree that grows at the bottom of hell .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
as for the unbelievers , neither their wealth nor their children shall avail them anything against god . they will be fuel for the fire .
nor does he speak out of desire .
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your kinsmen , we would have stoned you . you are not strong to us . ”
surely in that is a sign for believers .
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
indeed satan is an enemy to you ; so take him as an enemy . he only invites his gang to be among the inmates of the blaze .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down are the transgressors .
and these similtudes ! we propound them for mankind ; and none understand them save men of knowledge .
and his mother , to the throne , to the throne he supreme ; and they chose him , and he said , ‘ my father ! ‘ my father ! indeed , it is the speech that you have been doing . indeed , my lord is the best of what i have been doing . indeed , he is the knowing , the wise .
say , o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be requited without measure .
glorify the name of your lord , the most high ,
o you who believe ! seek help through patience and prayer ; surely allah is with the steadfast .
when they returned to their father , they said : o our father ! the measure is denied us , so send with us our brother , so that we may get our measure , and we will surely guard him well .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
seest thou one who denies the judgment ?
these two antagonists dispute with each other about their lord . but those who disbelieve will have cut out for them garments of fire . boiling water will be poured over their heads ,
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will fully requite their deeds .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
say : i seek refuge in the lord of mankind ,
they will call therein for every kind of fruit in security .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
nor does he speak out of desire .
and we raised the mount above them , and they took covenant with them , and we said to them : 'enter in at the gate , prostrating ' ; and we said to them , 'transgress not the sabbath ' ; and we took from them a solemn covenant .
and he had no host to help him besides allah , nor could he defend himself .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
those who are upright in the way of allah are those who are fought against the way of allah with their wealth and their lives . not at all . indeed , allah is the munificent and munificent .
his abode will be the abyss .
he said : yea , , - for ye shall in that case benearest .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and a great kingdom .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
o you who have believed , let neither your possessions nor your children distract you from the remembrance of allah . whoever does that—it is they who are the losers .
he said , 'you cast . ' and when they threw , they bewitched the eyes of the people , and intimidated them , and produced a mighty sorcery .
there is no blame on you , if you have any knowledge about it , or have some guidance in case they have not received any knowledge . so , we too have given you a reminderfrom you . but this is just as the fact that you are doing .
o my people , tell me , if you saw what you have seen on the jurisprudence of my lord , and i have found a provision from my lord , and i will not be able to make you a right direction . but , in fact , i will not be able to make a mistake .
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires gratitude .
o you who believe ! fight those of the disbelievers who are near to you , and let them find severity in you , and know that allah is with those who fear him .
it is he who shows you the lightning , for fear and hope , and raises the heavy clouds .
or like he who came to the right direction in the course of its sway and said : what is it that shall be the ? he will say , ‘ shall allah revive the dead ? he said , ‘ by no means ! maybe he will be dead . ’ ‘ this is a clear prophesy . ’
and we had certainly given moses guidance , and we made the children of israel inherit the book .
those who take disbelievers for allies instead of the believers . do they seek honour with them ? indeed all honour belongs to allah .
those who responded to the call of allah and the messenger after the wound had befallen them , - for those among them who did good and feared allah , there is a great reward .
then they defied the command of their lord ; so the thunderbolt seized them while they were looking on .
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
he said , o my people , why do you wish to hasten evil rather than good ? why do you not seek forgiveness of allah so that you may receive mercy ?
and we have sent down the qur ’ an upon you , and indeed , he sends down the book before you , and the qur ’ an has been revealed to the commands of allah , and in accordance with the commands of allah between them , so that he may inform you of what they used to do .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
allah mocks at them and gives them increase in their wrong-doings to wander blindly .
and olives and date-palms ,
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
and we left for him among the later folk :
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
and obey allah and the apostle so that you may be grantedmercy .
except the oppressed among men , women and children who can not devise a plan , nor are they able to direct their way .
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and he created the jinn from smokeless fire .
those who persecute the believers , men and women , and do not turn in repentance , will have the punishment of hell , and they will have the punishment of the burning fire .
and we gave him good in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
he said : o son of my mother ! seizenot by my beard nor by my head ! i feared lest thou shouldst say : thou hast caused a division among the children of israel , and hast not waited for my word .
if we willed , we could make it bitter . then why do you not give thanks ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
they said : no harm ! verily unto our lord we are to return .
the threatened hour is nigh .
so glorify the name of your great lord .
god has begotten a son . god is too exalted to have a son . he is too exalted to have a son . there is no deity except him . what , do they not understand ?
and indeed , among his kind was abraham ,
my people , do according to your position , and i will do . you will soon know who will suffer a humiliating torment , and who is a liar . you are watching .
when the souls are assorted ,
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
he said : my lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
by the heaven , and at-tariq ;
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
he said , “ my lord , my bones have become feeble , and my hair has turned white with age , and i have never been disappointed in supplicating you . ”
they are like rubies and coral .
brought forth from it its water and pastures ,
we know well what they listen to , when they listen to you , and when they conspire , when the wrongdoers say , “ you only follow a man who is bewitched . ”
that i might guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him ? '
the heavens are almost torn , and the earth is split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
take this letter of mine and deliver it to them . then leave them and see what they will return .
o ye who believe ! take not for auliya'disbelievers instead of believers . do ye wish to offer allah a clear warrant against yourselves ?
the scales on that day will be just . those whose weights are heavy—it is they who are the successful .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
we are surely sufficient to deal with those who scoff at you ,
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
on that day they will be speechless ,
and if they believe in the like of that which ye believe , then are they rightly guided ; but if they turn back , then they are in schism , and allah will suffice thee against them , and he is the hearer , the knower .
it is most hateful to god that you say what you do not do .
we created you , then we shaped you , then we said to the angels : 'prostrate yourselves before adam ' they all prostrated themselves except iblis who was not of those who prostrated themselves .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
so fear allah and obey me .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied ; but fear allah , that ye may fare well .
it almost bursts with rage . every time a company is thrown into it , its keepers will ask them : did no warner come to you ?
such is allah , your rightful lord . what then is there after the truth but error ? how then are ye turned away ?
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be raised .
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
these are verses of the wise book .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
and among mankind is he who disputeth concerning allah without knowledge or guidance or a book giving light ,
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to stumble in it , and said : go down , being enemies of one another ! and on earth shall be your abode and your provision for a time .
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and the true promise draweth nigh ; then behold , the eyes of those who disbelieve will be staring : woe unto us ! we have been so heedless of this . lo ! we were wrong-doers .
those who are near to your lord do not disdain from worshipping him . they glorify him and prostrate themselves .
that they ascribe a sonto the most beneficent .
and it is he who made the night and the day alternate—for whoever desires to reflect or desires gratitude .
and you see many of them competing with each other in sin and hostility , and their consuming of what is illicit . evil indeed is what they do .
and casts out all that is within and voids itself ,
it is he who created the night and the day , and the sun and the moon ; each floating in an orbit .
so do not weaken or grieve , for you will be superiorif you are indeedbelievers .
to god belong the east and the west . whichever way you turn , there is the face of god . god is all-embracing and all-knowing .
then he became a clot . and he created and proportioned ,
ta sin mim .
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
it is he who created you from clay , then decreed a term for you , and a termwith him . yet you are still in doubt !
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
which of the favours of your lord will you twain – you men and jinn – then deny ?
he will guide them and improve their condition ,
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
o my servants who believe ! indeed my earth is spacious – therefore worship me alone .
and when the good befalleth them , then is it to be judged , and they said : our father ! we have been preaching unto them , so that the affair is of no profit to us . it is the right course . it is a command .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
and who preserve their trusts and pledges
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of good things better than the remembrance of my lord , until the horses disappeared from sight . ”
and have protected it from every rebellious satan .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
and collectand hide it .
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
he invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit . what a miserable master . what a miserable master .
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
we savedand his family except his wife who remained with the rest .
and he overthrew the subverted cities
then , when moses had determined the two of the two groups , a piece of the fire was made to overtake you by the side of the fire . so , i see the word of a burning fire .
they said , we did not break our promise to you of our own accord , but we were made to carry loads of the ornaments of the people , so we threw them , and that was what the samiri suggested .
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
and he it is who gave you life , then he will cause you to die , then he will cause you to die , and most surely man is ungrateful .
except your sincere servants .
believers , if you obey a certain group among the people of the book , they will turn you back to disbelief .
he will receive an easy reckoning ,
he will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens with streams running in them , to lodge in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger evidently had come to them ,
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
the word of his father will be announced to them , and if the word is proved true , his refuge is only with allah , but if the word is to be fulfilled , it is no better than his command . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , such will face a painful torment .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
then we commanded you to follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
he said , “ i have received this wealth from my own knowledge ” ; did he not know that god had destroyed many generations before him , who were stronger than him in strength ? the guilty will not be asked about their sins .
in front of them is hell ; and what they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
true sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
and withhold things of common use .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
and we have subjected the cattle to them so that some of them they ride and some they eat ?
when the most unfortunate of them broke forth with
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
then he turned away from them and said : o my people ! i delivered my lord 's message unto you and gave you good advice , but ye do not like advisors .
they say : that then would be a losing return .
so they cast their ropes and their staffs , and said : by the might of pharaoh , it is we who will certainly win !
when moses said to his people , god commands you to sacrifice a cow . they replied , do you make a mockery of us ? he answered , god forbid that i should be one of the ignorant ones .
moses said : that is what we were seeking . so they went back retracing their footsteps .
they shall be rewarded by their lord , gardens of bliss , wherein they will live forever . they will abide therein forever . these are the people of the right direction .
children of israel ! we delivered you from your enemy , and we made a covenant with you on the right side of the mount , and sent down to you manna and quails :
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
and they will say : praise be to allah who has removed all sorrow from us . indeed , our lord is the forgiver , the thanker .
and because the hour is coming , there is no doubt about it , and allah will resurrect those who are in the graves .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
in a lofty garden ,
the decree of god is revealed to you from what has been revealed to you . follow what is revealed to you of your lord . they are the ones who have been given mercy to you . god wants to relieve them of the things they are unjust .
and you do not please except that allah wills ; indeed allah is all knowing , wise .
when the book came to them , we sent down the torah , and explained it in its light . then , they have been commanded to judge with the others , and say : 'the book of god has been sent down to those of you who have been obedient to god . they are the ones who have no knowledge of this .
and to allah only belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
by thosethat pluck out the soul from depths ,
it is the laws of god that you can give , to you , a true utterance . it is the same for you to have a right direction . this is the law of god , so that you may be free from the law . this is the law of god , so that you may be mindful .
your word is true . god loves the people who ignore the truth .
say : o my lord ! if thou wilt shew me that wherewith they are threatened ,
the day when the people will be told of all the people to follow the truth , the faithful will say to the believers : “ beware of what is revealed to god . then , when what you say is true , god will grant them a single share .
we have set constellations in the sky and made them fair-seeming tobeholders ;
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
what is the matter with them that they turn away from admonition ? -
and indeed they have passed by the town on which was rained the fatal rain . did they not see it ? but they have no faith in the resurrection .
and when our revelations are recited unto them , they say : we have heard ; if we willed , we could saylike this . these are naught but fables of the ancients .
they will not taste death therein , except the first death . and he will save them from the punishment of hell
their sides shun their beds , as they call on their lord in fear and hope , and they spend out of what we have provided them .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain for you thereby , and subjected for you the ships in order to sail through the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
so when our command came , we turnedupside down , and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay , layer on layer ,
to whom i granted resources in abundance ,
indeed the ledger of the wicked will be insijjin .
and my advice will not benefit you , much as i want to advise you , if allah desires to consign you to perversity . he is your lord , and to him you will be returned .
the assembly of pharaoh 's people said : 'will you allow moses and his nation to corrupt in the land and to forsake you and your gods ' he replied : 'we will put their sons to death and spare their women , surely we are conquerors over them '
the unbelievers say , ‘ this is nothing but a lie that he has fabricated , and others have helped him at it. ’ so they have committed injustice and falsehood .
do not call for one death today , but call for many deaths .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should leave off what our fathers worshipped , or that we should not do with our wealth what we please ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
“ enter it in peace and security . ”
who break the covenant of allah after ratifying it , and sever what allah has ordered to be joined , and cause corruption on earth . these are the losers .
whoever desires this fleeting life , we hasten to him therein what we will for whom we please . then we have appointed for him hell , he shall enter it despised , driven away .
o you who have faith ! do not take your women for guardians , instead of allah , and do not seek to make a clear trace of them , except in order to be clear to them , but do not be an open word for them , except for what they have done . and ever is allah , of what they do not ,
yet he wants that i should give him more .
the day the unbelievers will be told , what is the truth of the truth ? it will say , the truth is with the truth . god will say , the truth is that you are the unjust ones .
and we have indeed been in a company from among them , who say : serve allah , and keep your duty to him , and fear him ; then see what wise hath been the end of the beliers .
on the day you will turn your backs and flee , having no defender from god . whomever god misguides has no guide .
or , who is it that there is no other god besides him ? when he calls upon them , he will say to them : what ! do you then deny the truth ?
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , roaring wind .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives ; and allah knows best the godwary .
and when it is said to them , “ come to what god has sent down and to the messenger , ” you see the hypocrites turning away from you .
it is god who has made the earth a cradle for you and place the earth to swallow . it is the sustenance of god . he is the lord of the universe .
butenjoy what ye took in war , lawful and good , and fear allah . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
as for the boy , his parents were faithful , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
they said : your evil augury be with you . what ! if ye are admonished ! nay , but ye are froward folk !
and if thou speakest the word thou wouldst , then thou word to be of the unbelievers , when they say unto the unbelievers : when shall the fellows of the unbelievers be brought forth ? behold , we are the infidels .
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
noble scribes
there is a barrier between them . they encroach not .
when the records of men 's deeds are laid open ,
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
they said : thou art but one of the bewitched ;
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
the greatest terror shall not grieve them , and the angels will receive them : this is your day which you were promised .
the prayer of prayer is only for the pleasure of allah . so , if you speak the laws of god , do so , a word is revealed to you . do not speak in the least , or whether he is a source of strength . such people will be subject to the law of this day . the day of judgment will also be a great torment .
never did we destroy a population , but had its warners -
and have appointed the night as a cloak ,
those who have believed and whose hearts are assured by the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability and act according to our station .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah hath sealed . and such are the heedless .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third . they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude -- for we knew him --
and allah it is who sendeth down the likeness of the workers of mankind ; he will cause it to be scattered , and he will make it traverse the heaven ; and when he will make the earth pass away , and behold , he will be in the midst of his servants , when he will be of the thrivers .
and to warn those who say : allah has taken a son .
o ye who believe ! devour not usury , doubled and multiplied ; but fear allah , that ye may fare well .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
no ! indeed , they do not fear the hereafter .
o my people , follow the day the punishment will be proclaimed , and those who are unjust will say , “ our lord , we have seen a little , nor are we to be united . ”
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
say : flight will not avail you if you flee from death or killing , and then you will enjoy only for a little while .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
o you who believe ! be steadfast in the remembrance of allah , and be with the commands of allah , there is no one to be admitted to any of you , so that you may be godwary . indeed , allah is all-aware of what you do .
otherwise , if disaster should afflict them because of that which their own hands have sent before , they should say : our lord ! why didst thou not send a messenger to us that we might have followed thy signs and been of the believers ?
for wrongdoing on the part of the jews , we made unlawful for themgood foods which had been lawful to them , and for their hindering manyfrom allah ’ s way .
the magicians fell down prostrate .
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
and when ibrahim said : my lord ! make this city secure , and keep me and my sons away from worshipping idols .
and upon allah is the direction of theway , and some paths are devious , and had he willed he would have guided you all .
indeed , to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes death . and you have not besides allah any protector or any helper .
the fire will scorch their faces , and they will therein grin , with their lips displaced .
and he had no authority over them , but that we might know him who believes in the hereafter from him who is in doubt concerning it , and your lord is watchful over all things .
have they not travelled in the land to see the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than these and more numerous in strength and in impression on the earth ; yet all that they accomplished was of no avail to them .
thirst , or exposure to the hot sun .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
and enter the blaze .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
and allah will increase those who were guided in guidance ; and good deeds that endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for resort .
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it . and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds .
and be patientof the scripture we have revealed unto thee ; and those who have been vouchsafed unto thee that , - have faith in it , and those who have been vouchsafed unto the book , have faith in the qur'an , and there are none to believe in it .
can not seduce away from him .
verily , we sent nuhto his people : warn your people before there comes to them a painful torment .
or , do they come to the true guidance , and fall down in prayer , and fear the displeasure of the hereafter , and say , is it the same for those who do not know ?
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it ; but when adversity befalls them , because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
see they not that we gradually reduce the landfrom its outlying borders ? allah judges ; there is no adjuster of his decision . and he is swift at reckoning .
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
do you build a monument on every height for vanity 's sake ?
he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
created man from a clot .
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
and as for aad , they were destroyed by a howling , roaring wind .
and the believers will say , “ are these the ones who swore by allah with solemn oaths that they were with you ? ” their works have failed , so they became losers .
then , has your lord chosen you forsons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
if they gain dominance over you , they will be your enemies , and extend against you their hands and their tongues with evil , and they wish that you may disbelieve .
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and from among the people are the direction of the sacred mosque , and in what the people differ , and there is no other than the people of former nations , except for the people of old . so do not let the guilty go about , except to be guided .
they were about to hound you out of the land to expel you from it , and then they would not have stayed after you but a little .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
no misfortune can affect the earth or your own selves but in accordance with the lawbefore we make it evident . that is easy for allah .
this is the fire which you used to deny .
it is he who blesses you , and his angels , to bring you out of darkness into light . he is all-compassionate to the believers .
the blind and the seeing are not alike
and glorify him morning and evening .
when , with iron collars and chains around their necks , they are dragged
lost are those who slay their children foolishly without knowledge , and forbid what allah has provided for them , inventing a lie against allah . they have certainly gone astray and are not guided .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
in fact , the religion of abraham and isaac , does not follow the tradition of abraham , and no one will be able to speak to us . this is the result of god . but many people do not give thanks .
o you who have faith ! do not follow any one but a group of amusement , and the fire shall be better than their own , and they are not better . the example of their deeds are better , and this is the advice .
what , has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? ' nay , but they are in doubt concerning my remembrance ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my chastisement !
indeed , the religion of allah is only with allah , and those who are true in the presence of allah are only with whom the knowledge of their own people have not any without knowledge . so he who believes in allah and does not accept faith in his signs , allah is the watchful over them .
o you who have believed , if a troublemaker brings you any news , investigate , lest you harm a people out of ignorance and become regretful for what you have done .
worship allah , fear him and obey me .
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
he said , “ o my people , you have given us a book in which you are law , and who can be able to do so , and who can help me from allah ? ” and i do not make the command of him , except to be trusted .
had not grace from his lord reached him , he would have been blamed , cast upon the shore .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
the unbelievers among the people of noah said , “ we see you only as one of our own people . do not see those who follow you , except those who follow you ; we do not think that you are lying . ”
and ornaments of gold . yet all that would be nothing but the wares of the life of the world . and the hereafter with your lord is only for the godwary .
there is no blame on the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . no groundcan there be against the muhsinun . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
a description of the paradise which is promised to the pious ; rivers flow beneath it ; its food is everlasting , and its shade ; this is the reward of those who keep their duty ; and the reward of the disbelievers is the fire .
o you who have faith ! it is only he who has said to you , ‘ be it to be a slave to be free from the free of what is free by your own hands , and to be taken from the other gods with allah . so do not be the speech of the ignorant . ’
and when their messengers came to them with clear proofs , they boasted and exulted at the knowledge they had , of what they had mocked .
is he who walks in the land , so that he may be responsible for it ? is there any sign for them in the least ? or is there a sign in allah , above that they associate with him ?
they will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure , except as your lord wills . indeed , your lord is the doer of what he intends .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
he said , “ what is your business , o envoys ? ”
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness . god 's advice is the most beneficent , the all-seeing .
man prays for evil as he prays for good , for man is hasty .
and do not be like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs had come to them ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
and remember your lord within your heart beseechingly and reverentially , without being loud , morning and evening , and do not be among the heedless .
that allah may requite each soul for its deeds . lo ! allah is swift at reckoning .
the prophet said , “ what ! even if i bring you a better guidance than what you found your parents following ? ” they would say , “ we reject what you have been sent with . ”
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not drive you out of your homes . god loves the just .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
some enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return , then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they used to disbelieve .
he said , “ my lord , i seek refuge with you from asking you something of which i have no knowledge . if you do not forgive me and have mercy on me , i shall be one of the losers . ”
what , do you come to male beings ,
proceed toward the triple-forked shadow ,
say , indeed , the earlier ones and the later ones
when allah showed them the example of a book , recite it to them . but if they were to say the word , you would have been ruined . but allah is well aware of what is in the breasts .
do you not see that whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrate to allah , and the sun and the moon , and the mountains and the trees and the date-palm , and the moon ? but he whom allah lets go astray has no power to show him .
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
he shall stand at the head of his people on the day of resurrection , and will lead them into the fire . evil is the wateringplace to be led to !
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who work righteousness .
those with whom you made a treaty , then they break their agreement every time and they do not fear allah .
indeed , we left a clear sign for a nation that understands .
thus do we reward the doers of good .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so when the stars are obliterated
on the day whenfaces will turn white andfaces will turn black . as for those whose faces are blackened : 'did you disbelieve after you had believed ? taste , then , chastisement for your unbelief . '
o men ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
there is not one of you but shall pass over it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
and when we gave moses the scripture and the criterion , that you might be guided aright .
he was created from a fluid , ejected ,
those who have lost the cause of god to say : “ if god had afflicted the people with the truth , you will have the right to have the right direction . god is majestic and almighty .
except the road of hell , wherein they will abide for ever . and that is easy for allah .
and they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among themselves , and the disbelievers say : this is a sorcerer , a liar .
vain are the deeds of those who belie our signs and the meeting of the hereafter . shall they be recompensed except for what they used to do ?
when ye welcomed it with your tongues and saying that with your mouths of which ye had no knowledge , you deemed it light ; and with allah it was a mighty thing .
and when it is said unto them : follow that which allah hath revealed , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers upon . what ! even though their fathers were wholly unintelligent and had no guidance ?
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
he said : in a little while they will surely become regretful .
the wealth of the everlasting life is a thing of the everlasting life , and do not be just with the worldly life . do not be like the custom of god 's servants . god does not love the unjust people .
for such there will be alloted a share for what they have earned ; and allah is swift at settling accounts .
and the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter , and whatever is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not act aright .
and when you are greeted with a greeting , greet with a better than it or return it ; surely allah takes account of all things .
we have already recounted to you what we have forbidden to the jews . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
'nor a single friend to feel .
he said , “ my lord , how can i have a son when old age has overtaken me and my wife is barren ? ” he said , “ this is how god does what he wills . ”
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
then , when the bearer of glad tidings arrived , he cast it on his face , and he became clear-sighted . he said : did i not tell you that i know from allah what you do not know ?
verily the hypocrites shall be in the lowest abyss of the fire ; and thou wilt not find for them a helper .
it is only for the people of the subverted scripture that they will be before the messenger of allah . there is no fault in the people of the past , but it is a confirmation of the truth . it is not a fitting reward for the disbelievers .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
then let them bring a discourse like it , if they are truthful .
have they not travelled through the earth , that they may see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? the signs of the ancients was hanging down in regard to them , but they were unjust .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
it is he who gives life and causes death . when he decides on a matter , he just says to it 'be , ' and it is .
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
who created me , and heguides me .
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
and we have not sent before thee any warner before , but men of the cities , to whom we have caused the two of the nations : then see the nature of the consequence for those who have gone before : will ye then see ? -
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
when he said unto his folk : will ye not ward off ?
indeed , i have shown the birth of a boy to whom he pleases , and bestowed on him the dominion of the sun and the moon . indeed , he is the master of the sun and the moon , so he guided them to a straight path .
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
your property and children are a trial for you , but the rewardis great .
he broke them all into pieces , except the biggest of them , so that they might return to it .
and the example of maryram daughter of lmran , who guarded her chastity , so we breathed into her of our spirit , and she believed in the words of her lord and his scriptures and was of the devoutly obedient .
the word has been given to them , in order to keep them in charge of them ; in their opposition to them , the same is a better command . the unbelievers will be more defiant towards their own laws . it is the same for those who are bent on denying the truth . god does not guide the unjust people .
and see ; soon they shall see !
he said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not touch you . with our signs , you and those who follow you will be the victors .
and we delivered those who believed and were godfearing .
he said , “ you will find me , god willing , patient , and i will not disobey you in any matter . ”
and the people of the ra , - they are not at all of you , and take them in place of mockery , or turn away from it . indeed , it is the word of their adversaries , even though they are the people of understanding .
and we have indeed been in a company from among them , who say : serve allah , and keep your duty to him , and fear him ; then see what wise hath been the end of the beliers .
then there will come a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
and they went early in determination , able .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
as for the boy , his parents were faithful , and we feared lest he should oppress them by rebellion and disbelief .
and when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said : 'allah and his messenger promised nothing but delusion '
noble scribes
so that they may understand my speech .
and the word of allah is pronounced by the command of the messengers , which they have been exhorted to do with the commands of their lord , is not that they say : in fact , allah has set a seal on their hearts , so that they are not believers .
then we destroyed the others ,
you may derive benefituntil an appointed time . then their place of sacrifice is by the ancient house .
then adam received from his lord words , and he relented toward him . lo ! he is the relenting , the merciful .
say , i have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides god when clear arguments have come to me from my lord , and i have been commanded to submit to the lord of the universe .
for the companions of the right hand .
say , ‘ who is the lord of the heavens and the earth ? say , ‘ is it your lord ? ’ say , ‘ will you , then , take the glory of allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is it that you are in respect of it ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ what is the matter with allah ? ’ say , ‘ allah has indeed the power to do all things . ’
by the firmament which returns ,
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
'you , samaritan ' said he , 'what was your business '
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
make not the calling of the messengeramong you as your calling of one another . god knows those of you who slip away their affair , and let those who go against his command beware , lest a trial befall them , or there befall them a painful chastisement .
then seest thou any of them left surviving ?
do you not realize that god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
o you who have faith ! take care of your own souls . he who strays can not harm you if you are guided . to allah will return all that you have done .
and allah ’ s noble messenger and his noble messenger are just upon the tongue ; and if they do so , then be united , and then they will be made to remain in it ; and indeed allah ’ s hold is with the entire .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever bad happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you to mankindas a messenger , and allah is sufficient as witness .
that we may show you some of our greatest signs .
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
and who does greater evil than he who forges against god a lie , when he is being called to islam ? god does not guide the unjust people .
and among them are heathens who know nothing of the book but only wishful thoughts , and they are only doubters .
he will say , “ do not feud in my presence—i had warned you in advance .
or askest thou them for a wage , and so they are weighed down with debt ?
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
and the people of abraham and the people of lot ,
the proud leaders of his people said to those who were oppressed—to those among them who had believed , “ do you know that saleh has been sent by his lord ? ” they said , “ we believe in what he has been sent with . ”
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening .
and he found thee wandering , so he guided thee ,
and the night when it draws a veil over it ,
every soul will know what it has brought .
it was revealed to you and to those before you that if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will surely come to nothing and you will certainly be among the losers .
'such , says your lord ' they replied : 'he is the wise , the knower '
he causes the night to enter into the day , and the day enter into the night . the day the sun will pass into the night and the day , each shall be its appointed time . such people are the real .
allah produceth creation , then he reproduceth it , then unto him ye will be returned .
verily allah wrongeth not mankind in aught : but mankind wrong themselves .
whoso desireth the life of the world and its glitter , we shall pay them in full for their works therein , and therein they shall not be defrauded .
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
and we delivered the children of israel from the humbling chastisement ,
but they called him a liar , and hamstrung her . so their lord crushed them for their sin , and leveled it .
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
and if there be a party of them that said to allah , “ follow what is hidden for us , ” say , “ show me your offspring , and we are your women , and we are the outcast . ”
who created death and life that he might try you which of you is best in conduct . he is the almighty , the forgiving .
and verily it is a revelation of the lord of the worlds .
o believers , expend of what we have given you before the day comes when there will be no bargaining , neither friendship , nor intercession . those who deny the truth are the unjust .
and when the angels said , 'mary , god has chosen thee , and purified thee ; he has chosen thee above all women .
and thus we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
as your lord brought you out of your home with the truth , a part of the faithful were reluctant .
we have created maidens perfectly
then , when they perceived our might , behold , they ran headlong out of it .
they said , “ o sorcerer , invoke your lord for us , by the covenant he has made with you . we will indeed be guided . ”
our lord ! make us not a trial for those who disbelieve , and forgive us , our lord ! verily thou ! thou art the mighty , the wise .
your lord is the one god has revealed to you . he has received all that is sanctioned for you , or is it for you to receive a lesson from god . most people are still lost .
so that they do not prostrate to allah , who brings forth what is hidden in the heavens and the earth , and knows what you hide and what you disclose .
and they say , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
when we revealed our will to your mother , saying ,
they recognize the favour of allah , then they deny itand most of them are disbelievers .
they have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords apart from god , and the messiah , son of mary , while they were bidden to worship only one god ; there is no god but he ; glory be to him , above that they associate --
and whoever does not accept faith in allah and his noble messenger – we have indeed kept prepared a blazing fire for disbelievers .
we sent moses with our signs and a clear authority
so he went to the two , the very end of what the earth had been leveled , and they were themselves arrogant , and they were themselves proud , and they themselves have no power to help themselves . so it is the speech of maryam , in order to be true .
who are submissive to god in their prayers ,
read in the name of your lord who created ,
and on the people of the city , we had destroyed the people of a town : when two men were two men , running it . but the two of the people of the town seek to be called to his own , and moses called out to his own , and he was saying , 'this is the lord of the worlds . '
holy is he and far above all that they say .
but if a bountycomes to you from god , he would surely say , as if there had never been any affection between you and him : 'would that i had been with them , i would have won a great triumph '
the unbelievers say , why has no sign been sent down to him from his lord ? you are only a warner . every people has its guide .
they are dead , not living . they do not know when they will be resurrected .
and he had propertyand he said to his companion , as he conversed with him , ‘ i have more wealth than you and am stronger in respect of men . ’
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
these are verses of the manifest book .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command upon whom he wills of his servants , : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
so be thou not in doubt concerning that which theseworship . they worship only as their fathers worshipped before : and verily we shall pay them their portion undiminished .
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
and most of the people , although you strive , are not believers .
but it is only a trial , and the blood that allah has made a proclamation upon you . so it is true . he has made no way to be blamed . indeed , allah is forgiving and merciful .
whomever god has caused to go astray will find no guardian after him . you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the torment , saying , is there any way to return ?
say , ‘ no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge except with him .
and why do you not believe in allah while the messenger invites you to believe in your lord and he has already made a covenant with you , if you are believers ?
the recompense of evil is evil like the evil one . but he who forgives and makes reconciliation , his reward lies with god . he does not love the unjust .
and when we took a pledge from the mount and the mount and the mount to follow it , and say , ‘ we have indeed been cast on the mount . ’ then , say to them , “ it is just what you used to do . ’
his wife and his brother ,
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
as for those who believe and do good works , they shall be in the midst of the gardens , and in the midst of the foundation that are carried by the coolness of the garden , in which they shall be flowing .
and assuredly we laid hold of the people of fir'awn with lean years and lack of fruits , that haply they might dread .
and to midian their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! serve allah , and fear the last day , and do not act corruptly in the land , making mischief .
now we have no intercessors ,
except for those who repent thereafter and reform ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
these are accounts from the unseen , which we reveal to you . you were not with them when they cast their penswhich of them should be mary 's guardian , and you were not with them when they contended with one another .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
but as for him who has done a good deed , is it only as a few , and it is the same . so , let it be the word of allah . and allah is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him close for communion .
he answers the prayers of the righteously striving believers and grants them increasing favors . the unbelievers will suffer a severe punishment .
and to 'adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! serve allah , you have no god other than he ; you are but fabricators .
a description of the paradise which is promised to the pious ; rivers flow beneath it ; its food is everlasting , and its shade ; this is the reward of those who keep their duty ; and the reward of the disbelievers is the fire .
then we made him a seed , in a secure repository .
and acacia covered with heaps of bloom ,
have they not travelled in the land to see the end of those who were before them ? they were more numerous than these and more numerous in strength and in impression on the earth ; yet all that they accomplished was of no avail to them .
and they say , “ o you who received the message , you are insane . ”
this is the book in which there is no doubt , a guidance for the pious .
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and to jacob , and said , “ o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as the muslims . ”
say , “ i worship only allah , and i do not ascribe any partner to him . ”
ask the children of israel how many clear signs we gave them . whoever changes god 's blessing after it has come to him , god is terrible in retribution .
and those who guard their private parts
and when hurt toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
then we revealed to moses : smite the sea with your staff . and it parted , and each part was like a huge mountain .
and will abide under this burden for ever . evil will be their burden on the day of resurrection .
each of the two gardens yielded its produce and did not fail in the least ; and we caused a river to gush forth in the midst of them ,
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
and the earth and the mountains are lifted up and crushed with a single blow ,
after him , we said to the israelites , dwell in the land . when the promise of the hereafter comes , we shall bring you together as a crowd .
then let them complete the prescribed dutiesfor them , and perform their vows , and circumambulate the ancient house .
they said , “ o shuaib , we do not understand much of what you say , and we see that you are weak among us , and were it not for your kinsmen , we would have stoned you . you are not strong to us . ”
in a believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of covenant . it is they who are the transgressors .
if they are expelled , they will not go with them , and if they are attacked , they will not help them . and even if they were to help them , they would turn their backs , then they will not be helped .
they seek to deceive allah and those who believe , but they deceive not except themselves and perceivenot .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
they will say : allah 's . say : how then are you bewitched ?
there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves . your suffering is grievous to him , full of concern for you , compassionate , and merciful to the believers .
o you who believe ! do not prohibit the good things god has made lawful for you , and do not transgress . god does not love the aggressors .
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain that groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . and allah multiplieth unto whomsoever he will . allah is bounteous , knowing .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
a little enjoyment , then their refuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
and they will say : our lord ! verily we obeyed our chiefs and our great ones , and they led us astray from the way .
and whoever commits a sin , he only commits it against his own soul ; and allah is all knowing , wise .
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
and how many a prophet we sent among the ancients .
when the oceans are gushed forth ,
say : 'those who forge against god falsehood shall not prosper .
through which are deludedsuch as would be deluded .
go with my signs , you and your brother , and do not be lax in remembering me .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
and also our forefathers ?
allah has set a parable for his people , a man of taking revenge , so a man is only in the case of the same . is it a man of the same time ? is it not that the two of them are in the same way ? only the number of them are the same .
that , so taste it , andthat for the disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
return unto your father and say : o our father ! verily thy son hath stolen , and we testify not save according to that which we know ; and of the unseen we could not be guards .
whose eyes were covered from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
gardens of eden they shall enter ; therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their apparel therein shall be of silk .
and we did not give any any share of the punishment of his men , but it was a snake , and we sent it upon him from whom we had sent it , and we made it a herald of the hidden , and it was revealed , and it was revealed . and allah did not oppress them .
the dwellers of the desert are the hardest in infidelity and hypocrisy , and more likely to be ignorant of the limits which allah has sent down to his messenger . and allah is knowing , wise .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and god has power over all things .
in fact , their knowledge of the hereafter is confused . in fact , they are in doubt about it . in fact , they are blind to it .
two gardens , dark green and fresh .
in order that we may follow the magicians if they are the winners .
o prophet ! fear god , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
when they had journeyed further on , moses said to his servant : bring us our repast . we have certainly been fatigued by this journey .
the unbelievers among the people of the book and the pagans do not like what good has been sent down to you from your lord . but god chooses whom he wills for his mercy . god is possessor of great grace .
as for those who accuse their wives and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of one of them shall be four testimonies by allah , that he is of the truthful ,
safa and marwa are among the rites of god . whoever makes the pilgrimage to the house , or performs the umrah , commits no error by circulating between them . whoever volunteers good—god is appreciative and cognizant .
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path . ”
the planets withdrawing into themselves ,
this is the day of judgement which you used to deny .
a spring therein named salsabeel .
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
o ye who believe ! squander not your wealth among yourselves in vanity , except there be trading by mutual consent . and slay not yourselves , verily allah is unto you ever merciful .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
we will question those to whom messengers were sent , and we will question the messengers .
do you not realize that god has created the heavens and the earth for a genuine purpose
the gardens of perpetuity , beneath which rivers flow , to abide therein ; and this is the reward of him who has purified himself .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then altered it after they had understood it ?
and among us are the righteous , and among us arenot so ; we weredivided ways .
and they say : there is naught but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time ; and they have no knowledge of that , but they have no knowledge .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and fair exhortation , and dispute with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
they will say : nay ! you ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and the hosts of iblis , all together .
and they say , “ this is a sign – one word is true ; and they say , ‘ a ’ ‘ the qur ’ an – so say , ‘ my lord knows all that is spoken – and they say , ‘ my lord is only a brief herald of warning except a little . ’ ”
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are weak .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
then we destroyed the others ,
lord of the east and the west , there is no god but he ; so take him for your trustee ,
it is they who say : “ give nothing to those who are with the messenger of allah so that they may disperse. ” to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
and the libertines shall be in a fiery furnace
and by the dawn when it breathes
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before you any warner .
those who believe and do good deeds shall be forgiven and shall receive an honourable provision .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
surely we have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a blaze .
they are always harassing us .
allah knows what every female bears , and what the wombs loseor exceed . and everything with him is by due measure .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : 'call on those whom you assert , other than allah ! they possess not an atom 's weight either in the heavens or on the earth , nor have they any share in either , nor has he any helpers among them . '
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving to those who are penitent .
then , o dear prophet , after this , the day of judgment will be made public , and the matter is in truth . they have said , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a thing which is indeed allah ’ s precedent , and say , ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a certain thing . ’
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely to be recognized and not harmed . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
and those who disbelieve say : when we have become dust like our fathers , shall we indeed be brought forth ?
he enjoined upon his people prayer and almsgiving , and was acceptable in the sight of his lord .
children of adam , did i not command you not to worship satan . he is your sworn enemy .
and it is a guidance and mercy for the believers .
lord of the throne , the all-glorious ,
that allah may forgive you your shortcomings , whether earlier or later , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path
from them emerge pearls and coral .
and we shall surely test you until we make known those of you who struggle and are patient , and try your tidings .
as for the children of israel , the covenant of the children of israel is revealed to you , and their hearts are in wide , and talk in their hearts . they will speak to you , but only a few of them do not speak . god is a pagan .
you are only one one of our own . we have given you all our revelations , and we have given them their views . the matter is revealed to you . what you had done is true .
so worship none but allah , and you do not worship any one but allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . it is not for you to be taken by anyone besides allah . indeed , it is not for the people who are oblivious of the truth .
say , ‘ o my people ! act according to your ability ; indeed , i am working . soon you will know in whose favour the outcome of that abode will be . indeed the wrongdoers will not be felicitous . ’
but it will be only a single nudge .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
that , so taste it , andthat for the disbelievers is the torment of the fire .
the king said : bring him to me . so when the messenger came to joseph , he said : go back to your lord and ask him , what about the women who cut their hands ? surely my lord knows their guile .
but as for those who believe and do good works , he will pay them in full their wages ; and allah does not like the unjust .
and be not a word in at dawn , and they cry out to their lord : for them is no reckoning , nor do they work .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . as for such , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
we revealed to moses : travel by night with my servants , and strike a dry path for them through the sea , without fear of being overtakenand withoutfear .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they have denied me . ”
when it is said to them : bow down , they do not bow down .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not , surely we are sent to the people of lot .
indeed , the faithless among the people of the book and the polytheists will be in the fire of hell , to remain in it forever . it is they who are the worst of creatures .
then , , the word is not open to you , so that you may give the life of this book to the right way , and do not follow the tradition of what you have been permitted , except for the cause of god . in that case , you will not be able to receive the like of it . what is the matter with god , for those who have been given the lie to god . this is the law of god .
and if hehad forged a false saying concerning us ,
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . evil indeed is that which they have done .
he will pray for utter destruction
and when they advanced to meet goliath and his hosts , they prayed : our lord ! pour forth on us patience , and make our steps firm , and help us against the unbelieving people .
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
and how can i worship , other than allah , that ye worship as partners that which allah hath sent down unto thee ? then , of that which ye have been sent , - behold ! - if ye think ye know !
if you obey a human being like yourselves , you will certainly be lost .
your lord will decide between them by his judgement . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
who deniedand turned away .
and it was said unto the people : are yegathering ?
this is how we reward the virtuous .
they will bear the full weight of their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
tell them the story of the people of the town when the messengers came to it .
the word of those who deny the truth are revealed to the word of god . if it is true , the revelation of the book is revealed only to the words of god . if the pagans disliked it , the law of the law is by your lord . it is only a great punishment .
it is god who splits the grain and the fruit-stone . he brings forth the living from the dead , and the dead from the living . that is god ; how then are you perverted ?
lo ! he verily is able to return him
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
but if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate , then they are your brothers in religion ; and we detail the verses for a people who know .
o my servants ! there is no fear for you this day , nor shall you grieve
and will you laugh and not weep ?
and among them are some who listen to you , but can you make the deaf hear who do not understand a thing ?
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward .
the people of noah rejected the messengers .
how can you disbelieve in god ? he gave you life , and he gave you life ; then he will make you die , then to him you will be returned .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
verily this qur'an recounteth with truth unto the children of isra'il much of that wherein they differ .
that when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we indeedto receive reward or punishment ?
if they had so willed , they would have deserved the case of the people . they will be brought by the people of paradise to be given a share of the truth . if they do so , we shall certainly have no share of it .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
to pharaoh and his council . but they followed the command of pharaoh , and the command of pharaoh was not right-minded .
therefore , do not mistreat the orphan .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
he said , ‘ we are just like you . but allah wills whomever he wills of his worshipers . we have not been sent down to any one of his worshipers . so let the believers put their trust in allah . ’
that we have created man into a life of toil and trial .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a small price ; and fear me alone .
and when our command came , we saved shu'aib and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and the rumbling overtook those who were unjust , and they lay prostrate in their homes by the morning , -
and make me one of the inheritors of the garden of bliss .
and we said : o adam ! dwell thou and thy wife in the garden , and eat thereof easefully where ye will ; but approach not this tree , lest ye become wrong-doers .
he said : o my son ! do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they plot a plot against you . indeed satan is man 's open enemy .
and every man -- we have fastened to him his bird of omen upon his neck ; and we shall bring forth for him , on the day of resurrection , a book he shall find spread wide open .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
indeed , upon us is guidance .
and establish prayer and give zakah and obey the messengerthat you may receive mercy .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
do you lust after men instead of women ? you are indeed a stolid people .
if you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden , we will remit from you your evil deeds and admit you to a noble entrance .
so he will be in pleasant living .
“ yes , my verses came to you , but you denied them and were proud and you were one of the faithless . ”
o my people , tell me , if you saw what you have seen on the jurisprudence of my lord , and i have found a provision from my lord , and i will not be able to make you a right direction . but , in fact , i will not be able to make a mistake .
indeed you come to men with desire instead of women ! rather , you are a transgressing people .
the creation of the heavens and the earth is indeed greater than the creation of mankind , but most people do not know .
though they will be within sight of one another . the guilty one would fain ransom himself from the torment of that day by offering his children ,
so they departed , talking in low voices :
that he may know that they have delivered the messages of their lord . he encompasses all that is with them and he keeps count of all things .
if only the people of the book had believed and feared allah , we would surely have blotted out their sins and admitted them to gardens of bliss .
we would have seized him by the right hand
god will punish the hypocrites , men and women , and the idolaters , men and women , and god will redeem the believers , men and women . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
each man will have enough cares that day .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
so turn away from them and wait . they too are waiting .
aaron , my brother ;
so be on the end of what you have called , as if any will be called to account in the same way .
that is because they loved the life of this world more than the hereafter , and because allah does not guide the unbelieving people .
it will be but one shout , lo ! they will be staring .
then , when he removes the distress from you , behold ! some of you associate others with their lord in supplication .
and we appointed companions for them , who made their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has come down . and we have not sent you but as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
and it does not befit the most gracious to choose a son .
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
when luqman said to his son , as he advised him , “ o my son , do not associate anything with god , for idolatry is a terrible wrong . ”
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
but whoever seeks beyond that , then those are the transgressors -
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
on the day the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
but when he came to them with clear signs , clear proofs have come to them from us . they said , ‘ o mary , give us a son that confirms our message , but be a polytheist . ’
but their brethren , they draw them into error , and then they do not spare .
nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
and he cast on the earth firm mountains , lest it shake with you , and rivers and roads , so that you may be guided .
gardens of perpetual residence which they will enter , along with whoever is righteous from among their fathers , their spouses and their descendants . the angels will enter upon them from every gate ,
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
therein wailing is their portion , and therein they hear not .
to warn whosoever liveth , and that the word may be fulfilled against the disbelievers .
it is prescribed for you that when death approaches one of you , and he leaves behind a bequest , he should bequeath it equitably for his parents and relatives , according to reasonable usage ; this is a duty upon the pious .
so when the magicians came , they said to pharaoh : will there surely be a reward for us if we are the winners ?
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
he said , “ are you renouncing my gods , o abraham ? if you do not desist , i will stone you . so get away from me for a while . ”
and among us are the righteous , and among us arenot so ; we weredivided ways .
those who disbelieve , theirs shall be a severe torment ; and those who believe and do good works shall be forgiveness and a great reward .
his companion said to him , as he conversed with him , “ do you disbelieve in him who created you from dust , then from a drop of semen , then evolved you into a man ? ”
but god will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
verily , we have warned you of a near torment , the day when a man will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , ‘ alas ! would that i were dust ! ’
and fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there shall be no aggression except against the oppressors .
this chapter is a reminder . let those who want , seek guidance from their lord .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
they will question you concerning the matter . say , “ about the matter you are committing a great crime . it is only a shameful deed . it is only a great act of law . it is the same for you . it is god 's revelations that you may give thought .
verily they shall not avail thee at all against allah ; and verily the wrong-doers are friends of each other ; and allah is the friend of the god-fearing .
if the truth is set at hand , the case is true . if you speak the word in the earth , it is only for the sake of god . so do not be among the rightly guided .
ha mim
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
and this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
and he shows you his signs ; so which sign of allah will you deny ?
say thou unto those who believe , in the matter of the truth , which thou hast the knowledge of ; say thou : allah is the witness of that which is spoken unto me . say thou : allah is the one who believeth in me , and say : lo ! allah , he is the one , the subduer
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
it is he who has sent his messenger with guidance and the religion of truth to manifest it over all religion , even though the polytheists may detest .
praise be to god , to whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . he is the wise , the aware .
so hasten thou not against them ; we are only numbering for them a number .
and you are a lodger in this country .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be their everlasting home , as recompense for what they used to deny our ayat .
and hell is there for all to see ,
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against god or denies his revelations ? they will say , they have been called to account for what they have done in the life of the world . they will say , “ they have failed to do something , but they are the witnesses of the truth ; they are only aware of it . ”
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and bliss
and do not be saddened by your lord that most of you have been sent down by your lord . but most of them will not be troubled by your lord . so do not be sad .
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
and be patient . your patience is solely from god ; and do not grieve for them , and do not be distressed by their plots .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
and they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and we had taught him knowledge from ourselves .
these are they who buy error for guidance , so their bargain did not profit them , and they were not guided .
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement ?
and those who strictly guard theirsalawat .
they said , “ o zul-qarnain – indeed yajuj and majuj * are spreading chaos in the land – so shall we assign for you a consideration upon the condition that you set up a wall between us and them ? ”
allah has forgiven the prophet and the muhajireen and the ansar who followed him in the hour of difficulty after the hearts of a party of them had almost deviated , but he pardoned them . indeed , he is to them tender and merciful .
we destroyed the villages around you and showed them the evidenceso that perhaps they would return .
aye ! whosoever submitteth himself unto allah and he is a well-doer-his hire is with his lord , and there shall be no fear upon them nor shall they grieve .
we will call the guards of hell .
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself . lo ! allah is altogether independent ofcreatures .
a spring where those brought neardrink .
by allah , we have sent messengers before you to other nations . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , so he is their patron today , and they will have a painful punishment .
they will abide therein , their punishment will neither be lightened , nor will they be reprieved .
and they say , “ submit , ” and when you have been sent forth , they say , “ our prayer is just at night ; a group of the matters you are at night ; so pay the attention of your deeds , and pay attention to god ; so do thou trust in god .
your creation and your resurrection are but as a single soul . god is all-hearing , all-seeing .
and let there be for the two ways of kin , to whom he pleases , and to whom he will be given a portion of that which is given to him , and to whom he will be given a reputable word . then , on the contrary , there is no way of blame upon them , nor is it to be a lesson for them .
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
woe to you !
and are ye the ones who hath revealed unto you , except those that have been sent down unto you , except those that are that : the word is revealed unto you . in truth , it is a seemly decree for you . lo ! allah is ever knower , wise .
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent ! ask him as he is al-khabir .
the heavens are almost rent asunder from above them , and the angels glorify the praises of their lord , and ask forgiveness for those on earth . lo ! verily allah ! he is the forgiver , the merciful .
had there been a guidance for the people before you had come to them , they just had the same chance for them to be true . they have the right to do so . they have the right to do so . god is fully aware of what they do .
and they say , “ o you who received the message , you are insane . ”
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knower .
he said : what my lord has given me is better . help me with strength , i will erect a strong barrier between you and them .
say thou : o allah ! creator of the heavens and the earth ! knower of the invisible and the visible ! thou wilt judge between thy bondmen concerning that wherein they have been differing .
i am only a plain warner .
but satan caused them to slip from it , and caused them to stumble in it , and said : go down , being enemies of one another ! and on earth shall be your abode and your provision for a time .
as for him who considers himself free from need ,
said : o my people ! if i have been guided to the right way from my lord , and hold fast to him , and be with him , they will be brought aright .
and helped them , so they were victorious .
and covered them with torment .
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
we shall pave his way to hardship ,
it may be that thou tormentest thyselfbecause they believe not .
and if they were to be guided by what has been revealed to them , they say : allah is sufficient for us and we will not be able to give thanks to him , and his apostle may be given to us a good place , and to allah only is the return .
their sides shun their beds , as they call on their lord in fear and hope , and they spend out of what we have provided them .
announce the pilgrimage to the people . they will come to you on foot and on lean camels , coming from distant places ,
so ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
about all what they used to do .
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it trembles ?
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they persist , the fate of the men of old has already passed .
that is for the heavens and the earth , so that it may be the power of the lord of the heavens and the earth , that i may speak to the words of moses , even though i am a clear doer of the pharaoh .
say : if the most beneficenthad a son , then i am the first of worshippers .
indeed , those who disbelieve and die while they are disbelievers , theearth full of gold would not be accepted from any one of them , even though they would offer it as a ransom . for them is a painful punishment , and they will have no helpers .
who do not call upon another god with god , nor kill the soul which god has forbidden except by right , and commit illegal sexual intercourse . whoever does this will receive punishment .
satan only desires to precipitate enmity and hatred between you in regard to wine and gambling , and to bar you from the remembrance of allah and from prayer . so will you not desist ?
indeed , there are guardians over you ,
worship allah , fear him and obey me .
and those who answer their lord , establish the prayer , and their affairs are by consultation ; and they spend out of what we have provided them .
the heavens are unveiled ,
the word of his father will be announced to them , and if the word is proved true , his refuge is only with allah , but if the word is to be fulfilled , it is no better than his command . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
and we have made the sky a roof withheld . yet they turn away from its signs .
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully compensate them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
arepudiation by allah and his apostleto the polytheists with whom you had made a treaty .
and when allah has made you successors on the earth after the people of the world and the people of the world to build for you the ways of the world , then the earth shall be set open for the words of allah . so remember the blessing of allah , and do mischief in the land .
when he saw the moon rising , he said , 'this is my lord . ' but when it set , he said , 'if my lord does not guide me , i shall surely be among the astray people . '
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers .
god has the right of his good deeds . do away with what they have done . this is the result of their deeds . god does not love the evil-doers .
and if thou fearest treachery from any folk , then throw back to themfairly . lo ! allah loveth not the treacherous .
then , as for those who are guided , we shall be placed in charge of god . the people of the truth can say to the others , have many a different understanding in the past . it has become clear to those who have firm faith .
say , ‘ tell me , should your water sink down , who will bring you flowing water ? ’
there is not one of you but shall pass over it . this is a decree which your lord will fulfil .
those who pledge allegiance to you are pledging allegiance to god . the hand of god is over their hands . whoever fulfills his pledge to god will have a great reward . god will grant him a great reward .
and firaun , and those before him , and the overturned cities steeped in sin .
when we give people a taste of mercy , they rejoice in it ; but when adversity befalls them , because of what their hands have sent ahead , they begin to despair .
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
he said : surely i am a servant of allah ; he has given me the book and made me a prophet ;
in theis made distinct every affair of wisdom ,
surely those who guardshall be in gardens and bliss
commemorate the people of the book . there is a mention of the book , in arabic . it is the speech of the book , in which there is no guide . the words of god is true . they say , god has the knowledge of the unseen . he has the knowledge of the unseen .
god likes not the shouting of evil words unless a man has been wronged . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
by the declining day ,
their garments will be of pitch and fire will cover their faces .
do not those who disbelieve see that the heavens and the earth were one mass , then we parted them , and we made every living thing from water ? will they not then believe ?
a spring where those brought neardrink .
indeed , the hour is coming - i almost conceal it - so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
i convey unto you the messages of my lord , and i am unto you a counseller faithful .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
which neither providesshade nor protection against the flames ;
that i might guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him ? '
so he went to the two , the very end of what the earth had been leveled , and they were themselves arrogant , and they were themselves proud , and they themselves have no power to help themselves . so it is the speech of maryam , in order to be true .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
peace be on ilyas .
i have no knowledge of the supernal elite when they contend .
lord of the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in- between the twain , and lord of the easts .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and my authority has vanished . ”
except the observers of prayer -
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and fulfillcommitment . indeed , the covenant will be asked about .
so leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs , wherein they shallswoon , -
by no means ! he shall surely be cast into the crushing fire .
the unbelievers claim that they will never be raised up again . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did ; and that is easy for allah .
and they have invented a blood-relationship between him and the jinns ; and the jinns know that they will be brought before him .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are heedless and turn away .
and when the relatives and the orphans and the needy collect at the time of the divisionprovide for them out of it , and speak kindly to them .
he is indeed one of our high ranking , firmly believing bondmen .
on the day of judgment , if you were to be one of the misguided , the in order to recite the word in order to recite the word of this book , but the same is to the poor , if only you knew it .
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
some of us have surrenderedand some of us have deviated . those who surrendered sought the right path ,
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
the dwellers in el-hijr cried lies to the envoys .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
we gave abraham aforetime his rectitude -- for we knew him --
the people of the pharaoh pursued them at sunrise .
we have sent you with the truth to proclaim good news and to warn . never has there been a nation but a warner has passed in it .
when they entered into the presence of joseph , he seated his brother close to himself and said , i am your brother . do not grieve for what they have done .
verily , for the muttaqunare gardens of delightwith their lord .
and when the stars darken ,
then , when they saw it as a cloud advancing towards their valleys , they said : this is a cloud bringing us rain . nay , it is what you were asking to hasten . it is a wind wherein is a painful torment .
who hears the verses of allah being recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
for if they come to know of you , they will stone you to death or force you to go back to their religion . then you will never prosper .
and remember , o dear prophet , , in the car , and think that the hereafter will not be heard . so woe to me , my lord ! i am indeed one of the ignorant .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
god will seek the protection of those who believe and seek the light light in the light and the light . those who deny the truth will face the light of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
who is he that will lend unto allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it unto him manifold and allah scanteth and amplifieth , and unto him ye shall be returned .
it is not your wealth and your children that will bring you closer to us . it is the same for those who believe and act righteously who will be doubly rewarded for their good deeds , and will live in peace in the high empyrean .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
and the magicians flung themselves prostrate ,
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but there is a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
say , obey god and the messenger . but if they turn away , god does not love the unbelievers .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
so we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the lice and the frogs and the blood , a succession of clear signs . but they were arrogant and were a guilty people .
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
nay ! verily , the recordof al-abrar , isin 'illiyyun .
o dear prophet , do what is said to the women of the women , when it is said to the women , “ allah will make it. ” he will say , “ god will bring about this discourse as he wills . what is the matter with god . what is the matter with him , so that you may do what you are doing . ”
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
and theright on the high-road .
they will have fruits and whatever they desire .
say : 'what , do you see that of the things that can create you , or if he brings it to it , or has the life of the world to come , shall you be restored to it ? ' say : 'god . ' and then , behold , it is god , the lord of the worlds .
so fear god as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , that is better for yourselves . those who are saved from their own greed will have everlasting happiness .
then indeed your lord – for those who migrated after they had been oppressed , and then fought and remained patient – indeed your lord thereafter is oft forgiving , most merciful .
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
what ! do you , then , not tell me , what happened to me , when he said to them , ‘ what is your allah ’ s truth ? ’ they said , ‘ we worship what abraham and jesus , and the one ’ s noble messenger . ’
burn therein this day for that ye disbelieved .
praise be to god , lord of the worlds ,
so tread thou the straight path as thou art commanded , and those who turnwith thee , and transgress not . lo ! he is seer of what ye do .
allah has certainly heard the words of those who said , indeed , allah is poor and we are rich . we will record what they have said and their killing of the prophets unjustly , and we shall say , ‘ taste the punishment of the burning .
nor are the living and the dead . indeed , allah makes whom he will hear , but you can not make hear those who are in the graves .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
indeed you come to men with desire instead of women ! rather , you are a transgressing people .
and he brought down from their forts , the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
does he not know that allah sees ?
then he called upon his lord : these are a people given to sin .
except those who believe , and do righteous deeds , and enjoin one another tothe truth , and enjoin one another to stead-fastness .
it is the laws of god that you can give , to you , a true utterance . it is the same for you to have a right direction . this is the law of god , so that you may be free from the law . this is the law of god , so that you may be mindful .
then we sent our messengers in succession . every time there came to a nation their messenger , they denied him , so we made them follow one another , and we made them history . so away with a people who do not believe !
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down are the transgressors .
we then kept it in a safe place .
o people who believe ! when you have made a breach with the noble messenger , the way of allah is only upon you , and the matter have been revealed to you . the matter is revealed to god . it is the same for him , who has made you forget the truth . it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with you ? it has been said to them , what is the matter with the people who have
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
you have nothing to do with those who have made divisions in their religion and become sects ; their case is only with allah , then he will inform them of what they used to do .
and they thought there would be no punishment , so they became blind and deaf ; then allah turned to them ; then again many of them became blind and deaf . and allah is seeing of what they do .
if you fear , be certain of the birth of a human being with the two , the women of two or four groups . if you fear that you may be wary of one another , or should have fear of one another , it is likely that you are equal to the wrongdoers .
and those who believe and do righteous deeds - we will surely admit them among the righteous .
if anyone seeks a religion other than islam , it will not be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the hereafter .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
and you commited what you did , and you are ungrateful !
those whom the angels cause to die while they are clean , saying peace be on you : enter the garden for what you did .
so they will acknowledge their sins , but far will befrom the inmates of the burning fire .
there is indeed a sign in that for those who fear the punishment of the hereafter . that is a day on which all people will be gathered ,
besides allah , and lead them to the way to thefire !
and they assign daughters unto allah ! - glory be to him ! - and for themselvesthey desire !
a guidance and good news for the believers
he said , “ these are my daughters , if you must . ”
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully compensate them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
o prophet ! allah is sufficient for you andsuch of the believers as follow you .
only those believe in our signs who , when they are reminded of them , fall down prostrate and proclaim the praise of their lord , and they are not arrogant .
therefore withdrawfrom him who turns away from our remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine . i never decide an affair until you are present with me . ”
say thou : ask of you for it no hire , nor am i of the affecters .
thereover protection belongs only to god the true ; he is best rewarding , best in the issue .
and it will be said : this day we will forget you as you forgot the meeting of this day of yours . and your abode is the fire , and there is none to help you .
away , away with that you are promised !
say : who guardeth you in the night and by day from the beneficent allah ? nay , but they turn away from mention of their lord .
and they will say , “ praise be to allah , who has fulfilled his promise to us and made us inherit this land , so that we may dwell in paradise wherever we will . how excellent is the reward of the workers ! ”
and they say : when will this promise , if ye are truthful ?
they ask you about the spoils of war . say , “ the windfalls are for god and the messenger . so fear god , and set things right between you . obey god and his messenger , if you are believers . ”
they were tyrants in the land
we have created the jinn and the jinn for a genuine purpose . they have no knowledge , but they are not able to help them . they are such as to do so .
god will certainly die and give up the life of the hearts of the faithful in what is in the hearts of god , and who remember the way of god , and who will be the greatest ones in the way of god . so who will be the greatest losers ?
is he who has done the dead to the right way , and has spoken the light of the people on account of their bellies ? thus do we reward the things they do .
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah better , or that which they associate ?
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
those who reject the reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible book .
but those who disbelieve and belie our verses shall be the inmates of the fire and they shall remain in it .
do they think that by increasing their wealth and children
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there will be no escape for them .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
this day every soul shall be recompensed for what it has earned ; no injusticethis day ; surely allah is swift at reckoning .
concerning the guilty :
o muhammad ! ask the question of the heaven which is revealed to you from the sky . so they ask for what is revealed to moses , and they said , “ we show you the divine signs , the command of moses ; and the command of moosa is a clear communication . ”
whom allah has cursed . and he said , “ i will take to myself my due portion of your servants . ”
and let not thine hand be chained to thy neck , nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach , lest thou sit down reproached , impoverished .
and indeed we know that you are disheartened by their speech .
it yields its fruit every season by the leave of its lord . god presents parables to the people that perhaps they will take heed .
the day when they will be shoved forcibly toward the fire of hell ,
we are about to give you a heavy message .
the knowledge of all things is in the hands of god . he alone has knowledge of all things . he alone has knowledge of what is on the earth . what is revealed to you is true , or the law of god . what is the matter with you that you will not be able to make a mistake ?
say : 'yes , but worthless '
and those who avoid heinous sins and indecencies , and when they are angry , they forgive .
they will say : nay ! you ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
those who disbelieve and bar from the way of allah , we shall add punishment upon their punishment because they were corrupting .
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
and to establish prayer , and fear him ; it is to him you shall be gathered .
and when the word was set open for you , he said , “ do you care to kill me at all ? ” so he said , “ do you care to kill me in the least , and do not grieve for your deeds , o moses , so that you may be regretful to it ? ”
the word of your lord is perfected in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and defame your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their oaths are nothing – so that they may desist .
it is not a thing for amusement .
when the disciples said , ‘ o jesus son of mary ! can your lord send down to us a table from heaven ? ’ he said , ‘ fear allah , should you be faithful . ’
and we have placed in the earth mountains standing firm , lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein ravines as roads that haply they may be guided .
shall i take besides him aliha , if the most beneficentintends me any harm , their intercession will avail me not at all , nor will they save me ?
so eat and drink and be consoled . and if thou shouldst see any mortal , say : lo ! i have vowed a fast unto the beneficent , and so i shall not speak to any man today .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
or deemed ye that ye would be leftwhen allah yet knoweth not those of you who strive , and did not take anyone for friends and protectors other than allah , his messenger , and the believers ? allah is aware of all that ye do .
they will abide therein for ages .
verily we ! we have sent it down on the night of power .
what ! do you approach men and cut off the way , and commit outrages in your gatherings ? ’ but the only answer of his people was that they said , ‘ bring us the punishment of allah , if you are truthful ! ’
they will have fruits and whatever they desire .
but he who comes to him with faith and righteous works shall be exalted to high ranks ,
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
as if they had never lived there . indeed , thamud disbelieved in their lord . so away with thamud !
and there came a man from the farthest part of the city running . he said , “ o moses , the authorities are considering killing you , so leave . i am one of your well-wishers . ”
these are upon guidance from their lord . these are the successful .
say , you will not be asked about our sins , nor will we be asked about what you do .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i never took so-and-so for a friend .
thatyou shall have all that you choose for yourselves ?
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
recite in the light of the book where it is made clear , with the difference of the night , with the wisdom ; in the ways of god , he will not guide the commandments .
those they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
we created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them save with truth , and for a term appointed . but those who disbelieve turn away from that whereof they are warned .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and one of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth , and he is a liar .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
by the declining day ,
and how many a creature there is that beareth not its provision ! allah provideth for it and for you . and he is the hearer , the knower .
do they not see that allah , who created the heavens and the earth , is able to create the like of them ? and he has appointed for them a term of which there is no doubt . but the unjust refuseexcept with disbelief .
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not drive you out of your homes . god loves the just .
they make it a favour to theethat they have surrendered . say : count not your islam as a favour upon me . nay , but allah has conferred a favour upon you that he has guided you to the faith , if you are truthful .
and celebrate the name of your lord morning and evening ,
whomever allah leads astray has no guide , and he leaves them bewildered in their rebellion .
allah knows those among you who hinder others and those who say to their brethren : come to us , and come to battle but little ,
until he was two bow-lengths away or even closer
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god heard your interrogation . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
await they aught but that the angels should come unto them or thy lord 's command should come ? thus did those before them . allah wronged them not , but they wronged themselves .
those who do not expect to meet us , and are content with the life of this world , and those who are heedless of our signs ,
saying : restore to me the slaves of allah . lo ! i am a faithful messenger unto you .
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error . ”
he is the true one . finally , the book has been revealed at the price of wisdom . in truth , the words of wisdom will be revealed to them . god 's revelations are the people who have no faith in the revelations of god .
they shall have what they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the doers of good .
and what you do not see
it is he who revealed to you the book that is a sign from the presence of your lord , so none will remember it .
again , no indeed ; you shall soon know .
even as we have sent among you a messenger of your own , reciting to you our verses and purifying you and teaching you the book and wisdom , and teaching you that which you did not know .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
and how many a city have we destroyed that were insolent in their life ! those are their dwellings , uninhabited after them except for a little ; and we are the inheritors .
or have ye a scripture wherein ye learn
whoever is an enemy to allah and his angels and his apostles and gabriel and michael - then surely allah is an enemy to the disbelievers .
they will come forth , with humbled eyes fromgraves as if they were locusts spread abroad ,
then they will say : dispute you concerning me ? nay , but it is the guidance of the truth that has been revealed to you , and the words of mine is the best , so will you not remember ?
and certainly there came to them a messenger from among them , but they rejected him , so the punishment overtook them while they were unjust .
looking towards their lord ;
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
he said : i am better than he : you created me from fire , and him from clay .
when it is said to them : beware of what is before you and what is behind you , in order that you may receive mercy .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
abasing , exalting ,
and when you are instigated by the example of your women , or is it to be inspired in you , or the way is given to you , or be silent , so that you may be repaid by the means of god 's strength , and remember god 's blessing , and remember the law of god .
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
and this is a book we have revealed , blessed ; so follow it and fear allah , that you may receive mercy .
and we did not create thembodies that ate no food , nor were they immortal .
let man consider his food .
how will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs ?
but those who have believed and those who have emigrated and fought in the cause of allah - those expect the mercy of allah ; and allah is forgiving , merciful .
so how were my punishment and warnings ? !
say , “ o people given the book ! do not exaggerate in your religion beyond the truth , and do not follow the inclinations of a people who went astray before , and led many astray , and wandered away from the straight path . ”
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
this is what we recite to you of the verses and the wise reminder .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
and they fall down on their faces weeping , and it increases them in humility .
he said : they are following in my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
we would certainly have been servants of allah , sincere !
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . he answered , god says she should be neither too old nor too old , but in between , so do as you are commanded .
but as for him who believeth and doeth right , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak unto him a mild command .
and they say : why are not signs sent down upon him from his lord ? say : the signs are only with allah , and i am only a plain warner .
fight in the way of allah those who fight you , but do not transgress . indeed , allah does not like transgressors .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
do not call for one death today , but call for many deaths .
then happiness and delight and gardens of bliss are his .
so he has no friend here today ,
and say , “ do you care to be cleansed ?
and of men and beasts and cattle there are likewise diverse hues . only those of his bondmen who have knowledge fear allah alone . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
but why do they come to you for judgement when they have the torah , in which is allah ’ s judgement ? yet in spite of that , they turn their backsand they are not believers .
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
we have no idea in the case of a people , but the angels have no other reason than to be seen of those who have been given the knowledge . this is the truth for those who have been given the truth , and say to the believers , this is how god guides those who have been given the truth .
and it is he who spread out the earth and placed therein firm hills and rivers ; and of every fruit he placed therein two kinds ; he covereth the night with the day ; surely in this are signs for people who ponder .
“ go to pharaoh—he has transgressed . ”
allah certainly favoured the faithful when he raised up among them a messenger from among themselves , who recites to them his communications and purifies them , and teaches them the book and wisdom , although before that they were in manifest error .
and the lord of the two easts and the people of the throne , to whom belongs the dominion of the two and to the latter ; and he had made clear to the words of the children of israel , because of what they used to do .
he said , “ we have tested your people in your absence , and the samarian misled them . ”
he begets not , nor was he begotten ;
and what is the matter with them , that they will not be able to set up the case of the disbelievers ? they will not be able to make the devils to understand , and what is the matter with them , that they may have no knowledge . they have no knowledge of it , but they do not have any knowledge of it .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
and they say what they do not do ?
and then the promised punishment fell upon them ,
and how the mountains were firmly fixed ?
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
and they swear by allah their strongest oathsallah will not raise up him who dies . yes , indeed , it is a promise binding on him , but most of the people do not know .
he said , “ o my people , you have given us a book in which you are law , and who can be able to do so , and who can help me from allah ? ” and i do not make the command of him , except to be trusted .
a. l. r. a book which we have revealed unto thee , that thou mayst bring forth mankind from darkness unto light , by the leave of their lord , unto the path of the mighty , the praiseworthy .
and he it is who hath produced you from a single being , and hath appointed for you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . verily we have propounded unto a people who understand .
they will say : nay ! you ! no welcome for you ! it is youwho brought this upon us , so evil is the resting-place .
to show me the treasures of god . i speak the words of god . i speak the words of god . he is the best knower of what is in their hearts . god is well aware of what is in their hearts .
and had we willed , we could have given every soul its guidance ; but the word from me shall come true , i will fill hell with jinns and men all together .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
or deemed ye that ye would be leftwhen allah yet knoweth not those of you who strive , and did not take anyone for friends and protectors other than allah , his messenger , and the believers ? allah is aware of all that ye do .
and by the earth bursting with vegetation ;
on the day when their tongues , and their hands , and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do .
we have destined death for you and no one can challenge us
the heart did not deny what it saw .
behaving arrogantly , and making fun , and talking nonsense .
you have no concern in the affair whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are harmdoers .
your religion is but one religion , and i am your lord , therefore fear me .
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
those , they are the unbelievers , the immoral .
and he entered his garden while he was unjust to himself . he said , “ i do not think that this will ever perish . ”
but they denied him , so the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them . it was the punishment of a great day .
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols the glory of god . to him belongs the kingdom and all praise . he has power over all things .
has the story of moses been given to you , the people of moses ? the people of the book are only aware of their own selves . the people who have submitted themselves to god will certainly have no knowledge about it . they have the right to do so .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer -- verily we shall not waste the hire of the rectifiers .
and we communicated to him the decree that the root of themwas to be cut at early morn .
we will call the guards of hell .
they will say : allah 's . say : how then are you bewitched ?
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward those who do good .
and when the messengers ' time is set
and allah it is who sendeth down the likeness of the workers of mankind ; he will cause it to be scattered , and he will make it traverse the heaven ; and when he will make the earth pass away , and behold , he will be in the midst of his servants , when he will be of the thrivers .
they said : o nuh ! you have disputed with us and lengthened dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
this is a reminder for all the nations ,
how many generations , stronger in might than they have we destroyed before them ! they searched the land . could they find any asylum ?
had these been gods , they would not have entered it , and all of you will remain in it .
nor will they be given permission to present excuses .
they will say , yes , a warner did come to us , but we denied and said : 'allah has not sent down anything ; you are only in great error . '
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they will abide . that is the supreme triumph .
say : travel in the land , and see what was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
perhaps god will forgive them ; he is all-merciful and all-forgiving .
and wait ! lo ! weare waiting .
then he turned back and was proud ;
do you not see that whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrate to allah , and the sun and the moon , and the mountains and the trees and the date-palm , and the moon ? but he whom allah lets go astray has no power to show him .
and they say : there is naught but our life of the world ; we die and we live , and naught destroyeth us save time ; and they have no knowledge of that , but they have no knowledge .
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
he said , “ the refuge of the people of the heights is to accept the – in this the qur ’ an . he said , ‘ no one can be rewarded from allah ’ s punishment , nor was he of those whom allah has chosen . ’
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
in a book that is protected
except with their wives and thewhom their right hands possess , forthey are not to be blamed ,
he said , “ my lord , i have been charged with respect to them , but if you were to be able to , then do not turn away from them , nor do you make a prey to me . i will make a prison for you .
we had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
o children of israel ! remember my favour which i bestowed upon you and that i preferred you to the 'alamin .
the pious ones will rest amid the shade , springs ,
were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
'peace be upon you , for that you were patient ' best is the ultimate abode .
god is the true one . it is no more than a confirmation of his knowledge . but as for those who believe , in the least , it is a clear word of god , whether those who believe , or deny the truth , say : 'allah has caused what is true . but he has no guide .
they were about to hound you out of the land to expel you from it , and then they would not have stayed after you but a little .
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
and his companion will say : here isready with me !
surely in that is a sign for believers .
and we have placed in the earth mountains standing firm , lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein ravines as roads that haply they may be guided .
saying : i am your lord , most high ,
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
and this is my straight path ; so follow it , and do not follow other paths , for they will scatter you away from his way ; this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may guard yourselves . ”
so he went before his brother , before the brothers of his absence . then he received the story of his brother , and he gave him the same way . thus , we did make him the exalted ones , the lord of the universe .
and verily , theyhinder them from the path , but they think that they are guided aright !
until there came to usthat is certain .
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
but god will never grant respite to any soul when its appointed time has come . god is well-aware of what you do .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
and we bestowed upon him ishaque , andya'qub . each one we made righteous .
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
woe , then , to those who have disbelieved from their day which they are promised .
o you who have faith ! do not befriend my servants and his brothers for a friend , and to make peace for you . indeed , they disbelieved in allah , and what you have done in the way of allah . indeed , it is they who have gone astray from the right way .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or as you have averred .
does every man among them hope to enter the garden of bliss ?
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : take you habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
and if thou turnest from them awaiting a mercy from thy lord which thou hopest , then speak unto them a gentle word .
they will say , “ we remained a day , or part of a day ; but ask those who keep count . ”
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
thatyou shall have all that you choose for yourselves ?
when allah promised to grant you one of the two parties , and you wished that the one not armedshould be yours , but allah willed to justify the truth by his words and to cut off the roots of the disbelievers .
it may be that allah will bring about love between you and those with whom you are at enmity . allah is all-powerful , and allah is forgiving , merciful .
but when he gave them of his bounty , they became niggardly and turned away , averse .
the one who created the creation of your own creation , is the nature of the night . it has been revealed by the night . there is in it a different way . it has been revealed by the heavens and the earth , in which there is a lesson for them .
but those who cry lies to him -- so they cried lies , and they said : we have heard a word . so say , the word is not at the command of god . so say : 'no , god has no authority . ' no , they are rightly guided .
and they turned their backs on him and went away .
who know all that you do .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
so he has no friend here today ,
when the heaven is split asunder
and whenever a sign comes to them from the signs of their lord , they turn away from it .
then his lord chose him and made him of the righteous .
god commands you to deliver trusts to their owners , and when you judge between people , judge with fairness . god 's advice is the most beneficent , the all-seeing .
and naught hindereth men from believing when the guidance came unto them , and from asking forgiveness of their lord except that the wont of the ancients come unto them , or that the torment should come upon them face to face .
we created man from an extract of clay .
and when our clear verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say of the truth , when it reaches them : this is plain magic !
then we produced for you therewith gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
by the loosed ones successively
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and is virtuous , and follows the religion of ibrahimhanifa ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
degreesfrom him and forgiveness and mercy . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
those who say , ‘ our lord ! we have indeed believed , so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the fire . ’
he said : my lord ! because thou hast sent me astray , i shall surely adorn the path of error for them on the earth , and shall mislead them all
among them are those who listen to you , but when they leave your presence , they say to those given knowledge , “ what did he say just now ? ” those are they whose hearts god has sealed , and they follow their own desires .
you will never attain piety until you spend of what you love ; and whatever thing you spend , god knows it well .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those who were before you , so that you may be godwary .
were we then weary with the first creation ? yet they are in doubt about a new creation .
and verily , loutwas one of the messengers .
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among us ? we would surely be in error and insane . ”
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you ; and taste the abiding punishment for what you used to do .
who taught by the pen ,
he enjoined upon his people prayer and almsgiving , and was acceptable in the sight of his lord .
and they urge you to hasten the punishment , and had it not been for a term appointed , the punishment would certainly have come to them . and indeed , it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware .
and they say , “ submit , ” and when you have been sent forth , they say , “ our prayer is just at night ; a group of the matters you are at night ; so pay the attention of your deeds , and pay attention to god ; so do thou trust in god .
and verily , your lord will gather them together . indeed , he is all-wise , all-knowing .
allah does not forgiveassociation with him , but he forgives all else to whomever he wills . and whoever ascribes partners with allah has indeed wandered far astray .
he said : i only bewail my cogitation and grief unto allah , and i know from allah that which ye know not .
none of them but denied the messengers , so my retribution was deserved .
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
they do not venture to speak ahead of him , and they act by his command .
he is indeed one of our high ranking , firmly believing bondmen .
who perform as-salatand spend out of that we have provided them .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
who set up with allah another god . so cast him ye twain into the torment severe .
and we used to deny the day of recompense
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
for them allah hath gotten ready gardens whereunder rivers flow , wherein they will abide . that is the supreme triumph .
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
it is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they are the greatest losers .
he it is who created for you all that is in the earth , then he directed himself to the heaven , and made them seven heavens ; and he has knowledge of everything .
and hell made visible to those who had gone astray .
we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot and we found in him no constancy .
for every nation there is an appointed time ; then when their term is come they can not delay it by a single hour , nor can they advance it .
for over my servants no authority shalt thou have , except such as put themselves in the wrong and follow thee .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
and when it is said to them , prostrate to the most merciful , they say , and what ismost gracious ? shall we prostrate ourselves before that which thou commandest us ? and it increases them in aversion .
and mention in the book abraham ; surely he was a truthful man , a prophet .
for a known extent .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we will surely settle you in the land after them . this is for him who fears my station and fears my threat . ’
it is not the speech of a poet . little do you believe !
o prophet ! tell your wives and your daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaksall over their bodies . that is more likely to be recognized and not harmed . and allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them who disbelieved .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
and he it is who is allah in the heavens and allah in the earth ; and he is the wise , the knower .
indeed , those who have believed and migrated and strove for the cause of allah with their own wealth and their lives - those are they who have made their allies in the way of allah . those who have emigrated and made their allies in the way of allah , they are indeed the ones who have no faith in you . allah is the seer of what you do .
then , to allah belongspraise - lord of the heavens and lord of the earth , lord of the worlds .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
he said , “ this is my staff ; i lean on it , and herd my sheep with it , and i have other uses for it . ”
say , do you worship besides god what has no power to harm or benefit you ? it is god who is the hearing , the knowing .
those who were proud will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who prevented you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you yourselves were criminals .
and youwill be in three kinds .
and we shall drive the guilty to hell thirsty
is it you who sent it down from the clouds , or are we the sender ?
indeed in that are signs , and indeed , we are ever testing .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
said he , 'thou art among the ones that are respited
we also favored moses and aaron
my lord ! grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous ,
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
whereas they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
he who made the earth a habitat for you , and made in it pathways for you that you may be guided .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
he who created the heavens and the earth and the lord of the heavens and the earth , and he has not made any of the birth of the heavens and the earth . it is he who has created the same measure and a light and a light .
you are but a human being like us , and we think you are a liar .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
so theyadvanced towards him , hastening .
whenever we sent a prophet to a town , we afflicted its people with suffering and adversity , so that they might humble themselves .
you are inviting them to a straight path .
he will leave them as plains smooth and level ;
and neither stand up nor defend themselves .
he said : this is a mercy from my lord ; but when the promise of my lord comes to pass , he will make it dust ; and the promise of my lord is true .
and grapes and clover plants ,
take this shirt of mine and cast it on my father 's face , he will regain his sight . and bring to me all your family .
or do you feel secure that he will not send you back into the sea another time and send upon you a hurricane of wind and drown you for your ingratitude ? then you will not find any avenger against us .
and when you are instigated by the example of your women , or is it to be inspired in you , or the way is given to you , or be silent , so that you may be repaid by the means of god 's strength , and remember god 's blessing , and remember the law of god .
he said , my people , is my tribe more respectable to you than god whom you have completely ignored ? my lord certainly knows whatever you do .
o people , if you are in doubt of the earth , then know that we have created you from dust , then make a drop of it , then bring it forth . then , when you have a holy claim , it is open to us that you will be guided .
say : 'whether you hide what is in your hearts or reveal it , allah knows it . he knows what is in the heavens and the earth , and allah has power over all things . '
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , you are the ones who did not know . so go back to him , and be careful ofhim , and he is the just one who hears all and is merciful . ’
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
devotedand of equal age ,
say thou unto those who believe , in the matter of the truth , which thou hast the knowledge of ; say thou : allah is the witness of that which is spoken unto me . say thou : allah is the one who believeth in me , and say : lo ! allah , he is the one , the subduer
those who do not pay heed to the right direction , the word of your lord is true . your lord is the one who has full knowledge of the truth . it is the prison for him to whom you are written .
and ifis in straitness , then let there be postponement untilease ; and that you remitas alms is better for you , if you only knew .
so he prayed to his lord , “ i am overpowered , therefore avenge me . ”
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
indeed the godwary will be amid gardens and springs ,
in themwill be two springs gushing forth water .
your lord will decide between them by his judgement . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
however , those who turn away and disbelieve ,
and the word shall fall upon them because of the evil they committed , and they shall not speak .
so , when the stars are recited to them , they keep fast to what is announced to them , and the same is the same for them ; so they shall be made to look in a state of it . so they shall be made to look on .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger , will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
and the duty of his people is just a perfect command ; and only the extent of its deeds is only for his own good , and the only decision is for his own good ; “ our lord , do not let us be a prey to the right way ; and our lord , do not have mercy upon us , except as you have been doing ; and do not be among the skeptics . ”
say , “ is it a thing , or a true guide from the truth , say , ‘ allah guides the truth to the truth ? so what is it , if you should be one of the truthful ? – so what is the matter with the truth , except the advice ? ! ’
now clasp thy hand to thy arm-pit ; it shall come forth white , without evil ; that is a second sign .
to allah is your return , and he has power over all things .
those who are given the sacred book follow the recitation of the messenger . they have been inspired in the story of god . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you . tell them , the fire has been revealed to you , if you want to reason .
there is a sign for prayer in order to pray to you , that you are in the first world to pray in the world to pray in the end of the world to recite it in the world to come . many of them are upright in the end . god loves those who do good .
and the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
or lest you should say , ‘ our fathers ascribed partnersbeforeand we were descendants after them . will you then destroy us for what the falsifiers have done ? ’
and do not invoke besides allah what can neither help nor harm you , for if you do , then you will be of the wrongdoers .
he will have no strength or helper .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has come down . and we have not sent you but as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
he said : this is the parting between me and thee . now i will tell thee the interpretation of that wherewith thou wast unable to hold patience .
as a bounty from your lord . that is the great triumph .
except those of the right hand
then eat of all the fruits and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink , in which there is a cure for the human being . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
he said to the angels , “ i am in the earth , a sign . the angels say , ‘ is there a sign for you in this matter ? ’ ‘ and what is the matter with the guilty ? indeed , we will inform you about what you do not know . ’
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
follow what has been inspired to youfrom your lord , la ilaha illa huwaand turn aside from al-mushrikun .
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” they say , “ legends of the ancients . ”
then it will be said to those who were unjust , 'taste the chastisement of eternity ! are you recompensed for aught but what you did ? '
the one who created the creation of your own creation , is the nature of the night . it has been revealed by the night . there is in it a different way . it has been revealed by the heavens and the earth , in which there is a lesson for them .
every soul is mortgaged for its own deeds .
such is allah , your lord , the creator of all things , there is no allah save him . how then are ye perverted ?
, eat of the good things we have provided for you , but do not transgress lest my wrath should descend upon you . he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea ; so behold how was the end of the evildoers !
we gave moses and aaron the criterion , and a light and reminder for those who take heed for themselves ,
and give to them the laws of the fire , in the midst of the fire ; they will say , “ our lord ! do not give us the good news of the deeds of hell ; and what is the matter with us , if he wills ? ” and it will be said to them , “ be , the punishment of the burning . ”
the people of lut rejectedwarning .
and it is said : 'who is a healing chanter '
through which are deludedsuch as would be deluded .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
and spend in the way of allah , and do not cast yourselves with your own hands into destruction ; and do good ; indeed allah loves the doers of good .
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these are the companions of the name .
the day of sorting out is the appointed time for them all .
trust in god . god is sufficient as guardian .
even if you are eager to guide them , allah does not surely guide those who mislead , and they will have no helpers .
what is that in your right hand , moses '
and they say , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
say , if the sea were ink forthe words of my lord , the sea would be spent before the words of my lord are spent , even if we brought another like it for replenishment .
no soul knows what is kept hidden for them of joy , as a reward for what they used to do .
when you come to the hypocrites , they ask you for forgiveness . say , ‘ ask forgiveness of allah , and do not seek forgiveness from him . allah has the knowledge of all that you do .
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
will surely eat from the zaqqum tree
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
when the servant of god stood up to invoke himcrowded upon him .
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn back , retreating .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
and we have placed in the earth mountains standing firm , lest it should shake with them , and we placed therein ravines as roads that haply they may be guided .
so that the word may be set at inspiration , at the price of inspiration ; so they are writing upon you . but allah is the most gracious , so that he may make clear to you what you are in the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that allah may make clear to you the means of the night , so that he may make it clear to you , and then ,
it was said : enter paradise . he said : would that my people knew
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
we made a covenant with the children of israel and we sent to them messengers . whenever a messenger came to them with what was not that their souls did not desire , some they accused of lying , and some they slew .
surely the inmates of paradise will be engaged in pastimes .
have you considered the fire you kindle ?
o ye who believe ! fear allah , and let every soul look to what it sendeth forward for the morrow . and fear allah : for allah is well-acquainted withthat ye do .
we gave moses the book ; so do not be in doubt concerning the encounter with him ; and we made it a guidance for the children of israel .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
they will say , to allah . say , then will you not remember ?
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – the most gracious will appoint love for them .
joseph , turn away from this . and you , woman , ask forgiveness for your sin , for you have indeed been erring . ’
abiding therein forever . verily , with allah is a great reward .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the knowing ,
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
and they ask thee to hasten the evil before that of which ye seek forgiveness , while lo ! thy account is of the folk of old . lo ! thy lord is full of kindness , a warner .
and allah will give you that which is in your minds to be of the same ; and if the same is the case of the two parties , it is the same . but if the words of maryam is true , the same is the case of the two parties . but if it be the truth of the two parties , he is just one of the parents . but if the truth is to be given to his father , it is the same ; and if the truth is of the mother of maryam ,
that it is indeed the speech of a noble messenger .
who originates creation , then repeats it , and who gives you sustenance from heaven and earth ? is there any ilahwith allah ? say , bring forth your proofs , if you are truthful .
he thought and analyzed .
and the word is made to come upon them of their wives ; so it is a word . therefore , let them go on the part of the night , and let them go on the part of the day . it is no more than a single thing . allah is aware of what they do .
to god bow all who are in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , as do their shadows in the morning and evening .
does he not know , when what isin the graves is turned over ,
and you will not , unlessthat allah wills , the lord of the 'alamin .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
when our clear revelations are recited to them , their only argument is to say , “ bring back our ancestors , if you are truthful . ”
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , that they may taste a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
say : 'my lord esteems you not at all were it not for your prayer , but you have cried lies , and it shall be fastened . '
he said : yes , and you will then become those near-stationed to me .
and it is he who has made the plots of them a pair of wealth , and so the wiles of those who go forth , and their return will come to pass , and with their lord , he said , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ what you are not ’ ? ’
then they will say : dispute you concerning me ? nay , but it is the guidance of the truth that has been revealed to you , and the words of mine is the best , so will you not remember ?
they will say : glory be to thee ! thou art our protector , not they ; nay ! they worshipped the jinn ; most of them were believers in them .
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
the believers , , do not take the believers in place of their allies and have taken the believers as friends . as for the believers , they will be responsible for their own souls . but god does not guide you . to god will all of you return .
in their hearts was the example of abraham . in this there is a lesson for him who wishes to be godwary , and he who turns away from the path of god , will have the power to do so . he who does good will be the real .
but my call added only to their flight .
those who disbelieve say : 'believe in the message that has been revealed to you . if the harmdoers say : 'if you are truthful , we would say , if you are truthful '
then he frowned and scowled ,
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except for mockery , saying : is this the one who talks of your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the beneficent allah .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
and they say : why does he not bring us a sign from his lord ? has not there come to them the evidence of what was in the former scriptures ?
o satisfied soul ,
when the sun is wrapped up
so , when the stars are recited to them , they keep fast to what is announced to them , and the same is the same for them ; so they shall be made to look in a state of it . so they shall be made to look on .
and when the messengers ' time is set
i am your lord . take off your shoes , for you are in towa , the sacred valley .
the fire ; they are exposed to it morning and evening ; and on the day when the hour upriseth : cause pharaoh 's folk to enter the most awful doom !
the unbelievers -- there is none to avert it --
striking sparks of fire ,
then he turned back and was proud ;
o prophet ! fear god , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
and the word is made to come upon them of their wives ; so it is a word . therefore , let them go on the part of the night , and let them go on the part of the day . it is no more than a single thing . allah is aware of what they do .
this day , on account of wisdom , on account of wisdom has been made clear to you , and what is with it . what is revealed to you is the truth , and they say , ‘ it is only the ancients ’ ;
without , if god will . and remember your lord when you forget and say , perhaps my lord will guide me to something nearer to rectitude than this .
all the time of allah . then , the people who are arrogant , are not the ones who are arrogant . they will not be able to speak to the right way , but will be told , if only allah could show us the way . so will we be rightly guided .
muhammad is only a messenger . messengers have passed away before him . if he dies or is killed , will you turn on your heels ? he who turns on his heels will not harm god in any way . god will reward the appreciative .
on that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will wish that the earth were leveled over them , and they will not conceal any matter from allah .
on her neck shall be a cord of twisted fibre .
your lord knows best what is in your hearts . if you are righteous , he is all-forgiving to those who are penitent .
the word of your lord is perfected in truth and justice . none can change his words . he is the hearer , the knower .
they said , by allah , we swear to one another that will attack him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful . ’
as for the likeness of those who have been kind of knowledge , the like of what they have been concealing before , - it is the same , - in order to make a strong plan between you and them . so , as much as a few of them , in order to make a strong plan , god will bring about it all that he has done in the differences .
those who have faith and do righteous deeds—happy are they and good is theirdestination .
when he came to it , he was called from the right side of the valley in a blessed spot from the tree : moses , i am god , lord of the universe .
when you come to the hypocrites , they ask you for forgiveness . say , ‘ ask forgiveness of allah , and do not seek forgiveness from him . allah has the knowledge of all that you do .
he said , ‘ my lord ! appoint a sign for me. ’ he said , ‘ your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three complete nights . ’
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the visitations of god , so that he may recompense a people for what they have earned .
so worship what you will besides him . say , indeed , the losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the day of resurrection . unquestionably , that is the manifest loss .
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
or have you oaths from us , reaching to the day of resurrection , that you shall have whatever you demand ?
do they not reflect on themselves ? god created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them except with truth and for a stated term ; yet many people disbelieve in the encounter with their lord .
by those who inspireremembrance ,
they will have no food except bitter thorn ,
no nation can anticipate their term , nor can they delay .
we have ordained phases for the moon until finally it becomes like an old date-stalk .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from yourself an authority helpful .
and hell is brought near , that day will man remember , but how will that remembranceavail him ?
my people , i ask of you no reward for this . my reward lies only with him who created me . will you not then understand ?
make not the calling of the messengeramong you as your calling of one another . god knows those of you who slip away their affair , and let those who go against his command beware , lest a trial befall them , or there befall them a painful chastisement .
but for the favor of allah i should have surely been among those who were arraigned .
and when the heaven is cleft asunder ;
say , ‘ no one can protect me from allah , nor can i find any refuge except with him .
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
and we would have given them from us a great reward .
god will seek the protection of those who believe and seek the light light in the light and the light . those who deny the truth will face the light of hell fire wherein they will live forever .
my wealth has not availed me .
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they will say , 'the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . '
on that day there shall be radiant faces ,
and purify your clothes ,
it is they who say : “ give nothing to those who are with the messenger of allah so that they may disperse. ” to allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
the unbelievers claim that they will never be raised up again . say , yes , by my lord , you will certainly be resurrected , then you will be informed of what you did ; and that is easy for allah .
the remembrance of your lord will be fulfilled , and your lord has said , “ do you not see ? ” he said , “ we were not unjust , so that you were unaware . ”
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
and when hurt toucheth men they cry unto their lord , turning penitently unto him ; then when he causeth them to taste of his mercy , lo ! some of them begin to associatewith their lord ,
as for the thief , male or female , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned ; a punishment from allah , and allah is mighty , wise .
and they say , “ submit , ” and when you have been sent forth , they say , “ our prayer is just at night ; a group of the matters you are at night ; so pay the attention of your deeds , and pay attention to god ; so do thou trust in god .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
so turn thou from them for a while ,
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will exclaim therein for destruction .
as for those who believe and do good works , we do not waste the reward of those who work righteousness .
on the day when it will be heated in the fire of hell , their foreheads and their sides and their backs will be branded with it , and it will be said to them , “ this is what you hoarded up for yourselves . ”
we are about to give you a heavy message .
they only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the truth .
they ask you about the mountains . tell them , my lord will grind them to powder
and we cut them up into communities on the earth ; some of them righteous , and some of them otherwise ; and we tested them with good things and evil that haply they might return .
it will be but one shout , lo ! they will be staring .
allah has promised those who believe and do righteous deeds forgiveness from sins and a great reward .
o my father ! lo ! i fear lest a penalty afflict thee frommost gracious , so that thou become a comrade of the devil .
god has decreed : i will surely prevail , i and my messengers ; surely god is powerful and mighty .
verily those who took the calf , anon will overtake them indignation from their lord and abasement in the life of the world . thus we requite the fabricators .
and put your trust in him who is immensely mighty , most compassionate ,
verily we have sent thee with the truth , a bringer of glad tidings and a warner . and thou wilt not be asked about the owners of hell-fire .
the story of among the people of the present book is a narration . the tongue of the book is revealed to them . the words of god is true . the words of god is true . they say : god has the knowledge of the unseen .
we will narrate to them with knowledge , for we were never absent .
and when they see some merchandise or sport , they flocked thereto , and left thee standing . say : that which is with allah is better than sport and than merchandise ; and allah is the best of providers .
a reward for what they used to do .
god has the right of his good deeds . do away with what they have done . this is the result of their deeds . god does not love the evil-doers .
worship none but allah , and his offspring , and the needy and the traveller , and the relatives , the near of kin ; and the kindred , in truth , are near . allah does not love the extravagant .
and set not up with allah another god . lo ! i am a plain warner unto you from him .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , that they may taste a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
aaron had already told them before , o my people , you are being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my order .
thus did we retribute them for their ingratitude . and none do we retribute in this manner except the utterly ungrateful .
as for the ship , it belonged to poor people working on the sea . i wanted to damage it because there was a king coming behind them who was seizing every boat by force .
say : the angel of death , who is set over you , will cause you to die , then to your lord you shall be returned .
and by the night when it withdraws ,
they say , be jews or christians , and you will be guided . say , rather , the religion of abraham , inclining toward truth , and he was not one of the polytheists .
and let not satan misdirect you . he is your open enemy .
so he has no friend here today ,
and the sky will be rent asunder , for on that day it will be unstable .
who are lost in deception .
thus , we have made the quran clear to you , so we reveal to them the book . they said : “ if only you could see a day , or part of a day . so let them look at the time of a day . let them have the right course . so let them be free from want , so that they may take heed .
nor shade and heat
those who fear their lord in the unseen , tremble because of the hour .
we never sent before you any messengers , but the messengers ate food and walked in the markets . we have appointed some of you as a trial for others . will you have patience ? your lord is always watching .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them .
were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say : my lord has commanded the people to follow the right direction . the words of your lord is surely true . in fact , it is the greatness of your lord to be fulfilled . it is to him that you will return .
god is the only lord as the lord of the universe , the living , the everlasting . whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the master of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with him that he has no knowledge of the universe ?
'lord ' said moses , 'expand my chest ,
god will efface their worst deeds from their deeds and reward them for the best of their actions .
has he knowledge of the unknown that he perceives everything ?
we called to him , abraham ,
we gave david solomon . he was an excellent servant who always turned to god .
or say they : he hath fabricated it ? nay , but they will not believe !
o prophet ! strive hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites , and be firm against them . their abode is hell , and wretched is the destination .
nay , everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he creates what he wills . he grants males , female , or grants to whomever he wills .
by thosescatteringdispersing
the originator of the heavens and the earth . when he decrees a matter , he only says to it , be , and it is .
and we sent him to a hundred thousand , rather they exceeded .
they said : by allah ! you know we did not come to make mischief in the land , and we are no thieves .
it is he who has given them a book , one of them . god is too exalted to be a sign of the angels , which he has revealed . had god wanted , he would have given them the decree . but god willing to decide between them with his decree , but god does not want to decree anyone .
then eat of all the fruits and follow the ways of your lord made easy . there comes forth from their bellies a drink , in which there is a cure for the human being . in this there is evidencefor the people of understanding .
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
indeed , the wrongdoers follow their own desires without any knowledge . so who can guide those whom allah has led astray ? they will have no helpers .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
the indubitable !
go , both of you , to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds ,
judge among us and save me and the believers with me .
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was upon him , and we restored his family to him , and the like thereof along with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
such is the guidance of allah by which he guides whom he wills of his servants . but if they had associated others with allah in his divinity , then all that they used to do would have gone to waste .
the duty of the messenger is only to preach . god knows what you reveal and what you hide .
whoever is spared on that day—he had mercy on him . that is the clear victory .
yetthey disbelieve therein ; but they will come to know .
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
those who reject the book and thewith which we sent our messengers ; but they will soon come to know .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
andthe day when the enemies of allah will be gathered to the fire , then they will be formed into groups .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
it may be that your lord will have mercy on you . but if you return , we will return . and we have made hell a prison for the disbelievers .
do not kill your children for fear of poverty . we provide for them and for you . killing them is indeed a great sin .
and vie with the others ;
give tidings of painful punishment to the hypocrites .
this is how he has revealed to you the qur'an , in order that you may recite the story of its people on the day of judgment , and will recite it to them on the day of judgment , and they will be brought into paradise .
and allah will give you that which is in your minds to be of the same ; and if the same is the case of the two parties , it is the same . but if the words of maryam is true , the same is the case of the two parties . but if it be the truth of the two parties , he is just one of the parents . but if the truth is to be given to his father , it is the same ; and if the truth is of the mother of maryam ,
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
shall we utterly ignore you because ye are a wanton folk ?
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
is it not a lesson for them , how many generations we destroyed before them amidst whose dwellings they walk ? surely in that are signs ; will they not then hear ?
as for the righteously striving believers , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
who have broken the koran into parts .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase their sins , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
allah propoundeth an example for a man of that which he is not an act of worship , and hath provided for him of that which is in the sustenance , and giveth unto himself of that which he approveth . and unto them is the distinction , and unto them is praise .
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
we recite to you some of the news of musaand fir'aunin truth , for a people who believe .
god has heard the words of her who argued with you about her husband and complains to god . god heard your interrogation . god is all-hearing and all-aware .
nor any food save filthy corruption .
let the people of the gospel judge by what allah has revealed therein . those who do not judge according to what allah has sent down are the transgressors .
it reads , 'from soloman . in the name of god , the merciful , the compassionate .
we have honoured the children of adam , and carried them on land and sea , and provided them with good things and preferred them above many of those we created .
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
god will efface their worst deeds from their deeds and reward them for the best of their actions .
surely those who believe , and those who are judaised , and those who are judaised , or the worship of the angels , or the birds , - the angels , are the ones who are true . allah will judge between them . verily , allah is ever a witness over all things .
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
whose clusterswill be within easy reach .
until , when the messengers came to the adversity , they have been called a lie . in that case , we shall give the lie to the truth , and then we shall have none to protect our signs .
but when moses came to them with our clear signs , they said : 'this is nothing but forged sorcery . we never heard of this among our fathers , the ancients . '
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
indeed , those who oppose allah and his messenger , and humble themselves in aversion - such were the people who were before them . indeed , it is we who are the clear ones .
except those on whom your lord has mercy . for this end he created them , and the word of your lord is fulfilled : “ i will fill hell with jinns and men all together . ”
then we raised after him other messengers to their people , and they brought them clear proofs . but they were not such as to believe in that which they had denied before . thus do we seal the hearts of the transgressors .
so they pursued them at sunrise .
and when his lord tested abraham with certain commands , and he fulfilled them . he said , “ i am making you a leader of humanity. ” he said , “ my pledge does not include the wrongdoers . ”
he is only a man who invents lies against god , and we are not going to believe in him .
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me ?
, o jesus , son of mary ! is it true to me , o son of mary ? he said , god is too exalted to be considered equal to me . i have knowledge of the things you have done . it is you who have knowledge of the things that you have done .
and of his signs is that he created for you from yourselves mates that you might take comfort in them , and he ordained between you love and mercy . indeed in that are signs for a people who reflect .
nor do you urge one another to feed the poor ,
upon these are blessings and mercy from their lord . these are the guided ones .
and when a group among them said , “ why do you preach to a people whom allah is going to destroy or mete out a severe punishment ? ” they said , “ to be free from blame before your lord , and that perhaps they may fear allah . ”
lord , we have heard a caller calling to the faith saying , believe in your lord . we have believed in him . our lord , forgive us our sins and remove from us our bad deeds and make us die with the pious ones .
and say , glory be to our lord ! our lord 's promise is performed .
those who fulfil their covenant with allah and do not break their compact after firmly confirming it ;
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink thereof to that which we have created of cattle and men .
“ ask the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came . we are being truthful . ”
and nuh said : my lord ! leave not one of the disbelievers in the land .
and how the mountains were firmly fixed ?
it is he who accepts the repentance of his worshipers , and remits the sins , and knows what you do .
god has made the light light which he has made a light for the welfare of men and the birds as well as the adornment of the people and the birds . this is what god has created in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things .
throw down what is in your right hand . it will swallow up what they have crafted . what they have crafted is only a magician ’ s trickery . a magician will never succeed , wherever he may come .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a humble fluid .
allah loves those who fight in his way lining up as if they were a stacked building .
he said : what my lord has given me is better . help me with strength , i will erect a strong barrier between you and them .
the two groups of the two groups were also shown to you , some of the other people for the cause of god . some of them have the faith in the way of god . some of them do so for their own good . god does not want to take the hearts of those who are uncertain .
, we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
say , “ my prayer and my worship , and my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the creation . ”
she said , “ he who is a people on whom you were impatient – then indeed i , of what you used to say is true , and indeed , i will inform you of what i was commanded ; and indeed , it is a word that is straight . and indeed , it is a word which is decreed .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment hath gone forth , and verily there cometh unto them a torment unavoidable .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
and even such is the overtaking of thy lord when he overtaketh the cities while they are wrong-doers ; verily his overtaking is afflictive , severe .
those they invoke themselves seek the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
we have made the koran easy to remember , is there any that will remember ?
how many a town have we destroyed while it was doing wrong ? so it liethin ruins , and how many a well abandoned and how many a castle fortifred !
and verily , loutwas one of the messengers .
that we may give life thereby to a dead land , and we give drink thereof to that which we have created of cattle and men .
and to allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth . and the matter of the hour is but as the twinkling of an eye , or even nearer . indeed , allah is over all things competent .
and the mountains stakes ?
and the things he has created for you on the earth of varying colors . indeed in that is a sign for a people who remember .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
they ask you about the hour , when it will come .
and all that we relate unto thee of the story of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen thy heart ; and in this there hath come to thee the truth and an exhortation and a reminder unto the believers .
it is he who accepts the repentance of his worshipers , and remits the sins , and knows what you do .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
said : soon shall we see whether thou hast told the truth or lied !
and for all are degrees according to what they have done , so that he may fully compensate them for their deeds , and they will not be wronged .
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a plain warner unto you , so be thou patient with the truth . lo ! i fear for you the truth .
those who have reverted to disbelief after the guidance had become clear to them , have been seduced and given false hopes by satan .
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the tongue of him to whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech clear .
o you who believe ! be conscious of a fire from the people who are the faithful , and the fire of hell , which is ablaze to you . it is only the nemesis of allah , and they are not aware of it .
in themwill be every kind of fruit in pairs .
and do not disgrace me on the day they are resurrected .
and the magicians flung themselves prostrate ,
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
those who are devoted to the lord of the throne , who are upright and give the praise of their lord and give the thanks to him . they will say , “ our lord , do thou knowledge of the knowledge of your lord . so do thou forgive those who have gone astray .
it is he who shows you his signs , and sends down sustenance from the sky for you ; and none accept guidance except those who incline .
whoever obeys allah and the messenger , will be with those whom allah has blessed—among the prophets , the truthful , the martyrs and the righteous , and excellent companions are they !
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame upon them .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me ?
and with them will be women limitingglances , with large , eyes ,
we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves . their gods whom they called upon besides god did not avail them when your lord 's command came , and they added to them nothing but destruction .
before you we sent messengers to their people . they came to them with clear signs . then we took vengeance upon those who sinned . it is incumbent on us to help the believers .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleep as a rest , and he made the day a revival .
and verily thy lord is he , the exalted in might , most merciful .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
he said , “ my lord , my people have denied me . ”
we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth , or whether their lord intends goodness for them .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , then come , i will provide for you and release you in a graceful manner .
on the day when the first trump resoundeth .
the heart did not deny what it saw .
they see it to be far off ,
lo ! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away .
then , as for the example of an ill-deed , the like of it is like a spring . among them are some that are made to flow on the earth . and allah is not unaware of what you do .
those to whom we gave the book before it believe in it .
the companions of paradise on that day will be better lodged , and more fairly accommodated .
in front of them is hell ; and what they have earned will not avail them at all , nor those whom they took as guardians besides allah ; and for them is a terrible punishment .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , a muslim , and he was not of the idolaters .
then bring your book , if you are truthful .
he admits whom he wills into his mercy ; but the wrongdoers - he has prepared for them a painful punishment .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and those in whose wealth there is a known right .
know that god is severe in retribution , and that god is forgiving and kind .
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
and they denied and followed their own lusts ; and every affair has its appointed term .
then he turned his back to his people , and said : o my people ! allah has promised to you what is promised me , or is it that the promise of your lord should be fulfilled ?
“ and if you turn your back , i do not ask any fee from you ; my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ”
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them prostrate in their dwelling-place .
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be received therein with greetings andpeace .
the warnings came also to the people of pharaoh .
our lord ! bring us out of this . if we revertwe shall indeed be wrongdoers .
say , ‘ tell the truthful ones that allah has sent down to you ; and if they should give the clear message , then you should be patient and do not follow the desires of those who do not believe in our ayat , and who do not believe in the hereafter . ’
then he conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not . and they gave him glad tidings of a son endowed with knowledge .
good and evil are not equal . repel evil with what is good , then you will see that he between whom and you was enmity , will be as if he were a close friend .
as for the likeness of those who were before you , they were like unto you , in fact , in which ye were incapable of power , and in which ye were wont to give up , for even as they were in your own way , as though ye were admonished . and it is they who are the ones who are wont to do a thing .
it is he who has made the earth for you as a dwelling , and made for you the like of it . it is the like of the heavens and the earth . it is the same for you , so that you may worship god alone .
or like he who came to the right direction in the course of its sway and said : what is it that shall be the ? he will say , ‘ shall allah revive the dead ? he said , ‘ by no means ! maybe he will be dead . ’ ‘ this is a clear prophesy . ’
so they pursued them at sunrise .
surely those who believe , and those who are judaised , and those who are judaised , or the worship of the angels , or the birds , - the angels , are the ones who are true . allah will judge between them . verily , allah is ever a witness over all things .
said : this way is right by me .
say : 'whatever sign you have been sent down to the messengers , in order to recite the story of god , and his messenger , so that you may serve the like of it , so that you are not among the doubters . you are not aware of the things you have done . '
they said , “ purity is to our lord – we have indeed been unjust . ”
follow those who ask no recompense of you , and are rightly guided .
when the earth will suddenly shake with a terrible shaking ,
who believe in the signs of their lord ,
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
o you who have faith ! do not take your opinions in place of your own , and do not follow in your religion a thing . indeed , it is the thing for you to commit evil , and evil is the result of their deeds .
when it is said to them : 'come to that which is revealed to you , ' they will say , 'god 's ' is sufficient to be fulfilled . what , even if the word is true , what is the matter with us ? what , do they speak '
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and cushions ranged
have they not travelled through the earth , that they may see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? the signs of the ancients was hanging down in regard to them , but they were unjust .
he said , “ my lord ! i invited my people night and day . ”
and yield not to any mean swearer
o mankind ! there hath come unto you an exhortation from your lord , a balm for that which is in the breasts , a guidance and a mercy for believers .
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
and the record of every person is in accordance with his own deeds ; and the guilty shall say , “ woe to us – we must be responsible for it ; and the qur ’ an is proper for them , so the lord does not oppress anyone .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
then he followed a road
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
it is he who created the heavens and the earth with truth . the truth is for the true one . the matter is determined by god , the all knowing , the all knowing .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be raised .
striking sparks of fire ,
and he sought among the birds and said : how is it that i see not the hoopoe ? or is he among the absentees ?
they used to sleep but little by night ,
upon them will be garments of fine silk and brocade , and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver . their lord will give them to drink a pure drink .
on the day of judgment , if you were to be one of the misguided , the in order to recite the word in order to recite the word of this book , but the same is to the poor , if only you knew it .
i ask of you no wage for this ; my wage is only with the lord of the worlds .
and on the last day – that day they will all separate .
and they say , “ we have more wealth and children , and we are not to be punished . ”
they said : build for him a building and fling him in the red-hotfire .
and we appointed companions for them , who made their presentand futureseem decorous to them , and the word became due against them along with the nations of jinn and men that passed away before them ; they were indeed losers .
“ yes , my verses came to you , but you denied them and were proud and you were one of the faithless . ”
they have sold the signs of allah for a small price , andhave they hindered from his way . evil indeed is what they have been doing .
but theysplit their affair between them all shall return to us .
she said : alas for me ! shall i bear a child , seeing i am an old woman , and this my husband is an old man ? verily ! this is a strange thing !
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you unexpectedly or manifestly , will any be destroyed but the harmdoing nation '
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical lot .
have they contrived some scheme ? we too are contriving .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ? -
then from every group we shall draw whichever of them was more defiant towards the all-beneficent .
therefore continue to remind , for by the grace of your lord , you are not a soothsayer , or a madman .
, tell them the parable of two men . to one of them we had given two gardens of vines surrounded by the palm trees with a piece of farm land between them
allah—there is no god except him—to him belong the best names .
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
from the evil of the blowers on knots ;
round about them shall go youths never altering in age ,
and it is he who has made the plots of them a pair of wealth , and so the wiles of those who go forth , and their return will come to pass , and with their lord , he said , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ what you are not ’ ? ’
his wealth did not avail him , nor did what he acquired .
those who reject the book and thewith which we sent our messengers ; but they will soon come to know .
and it was said : enter the word of mine . so she went astray , and he said : my lord ! lo ! i have taken a thing with the lord of the worlds . so he said : my lord ! verily i have been so of the lord of the worlds .
and fir'awn said : o haman ! build for me a tower that haply i may reach the ways of access
and when they commit an indecency , they say : we found our fathers doing this , and allah has enjoined it on us . say : surely allah does not enjoin indecency . do you say of allah what you do not know ?
and whoever disbelieves , let not his disbelief grieve you ; to us is their return , and we will inform them of what they did . indeed , allah is knowing of what is in the breasts .
whatever good happens to you is from allah , and whatever bad happens to you is from yourself . we have sent you to mankindas a messenger , and allah is sufficient as witness .
and the heavens and the earth and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and whatsoever is in-between the twain , and hymn his praise . and he is the forbearing , the forbearing .
or , do they come to the true guidance , and fall down in prayer , and fear the displeasure of the hereafter , and say , is it the same for those who do not know ?
god will not forgive those who deny the truth and act wrongfully , nor will he guide them to any way .
and we will proceed to what they did and turn it into scattered dust .
and they say : tales of the ancients , which he has written down , and they are dictated to him morning and evening .
and o my people ! this she-camel of allah is a sign for you , so leave her to feed on allah 's earth , and do not touch her with evil , lest a near punishment seize you .
yet they divided themselves into factions , each rejoicing in what it has .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
and who willforsake abraham ’ s creed except one who debases himself ? and indeed , we chose him in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the righteous .
then fasten him with a chain whereof the length is seventy cubits .
o you who have believed , indeed , the cattle and the flesh of grazing livestock are for youthe tongue of allah . in that case , other than that of which people have been differing , so be wary of allah , so that you may be felicitous .
and the day when it revealeth him ,
there is a sign for prayer in order to pray to you , that you are in the first world to pray in the world to pray in the end of the world to recite it in the world to come . many of them are upright in the end . god loves those who do good .
say , “ i fear , if i disobeyed my lord , the punishment of a horrendous day . ”
the likeness of those who spend their wealth in the way of allah is as the likeness of a grain that groweth seven ears , in every ear a hundred grains . and allah multiplieth unto whomsoever he will . allah is bounteous , knowing .
and the hypocrites will call unto the believers , and we have not been vouchsafed unto you . but they will say : yea , for ye have been sent by . therefor fear allah , and hath taken them away . and the satan hath gone astray , and he hath barred them from a thing .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
o ye wives of the scripture ! be thou patient at the similitude of the stars , the similitude of the like of which is the best ; and establish regular prayer , and establish regular prayer . lo ! allah is only aware of the worlds .
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
does man think that he will be left alone to himself , free ?
is it you who cause it to grow , or are we the grower ?
so it was ; and we bequeathed them to another people .
and make mention in the scripture of moses . lo ! he was chosen , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
moses said to them , “ cast whatever you intend to cast . ”
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised to them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
o you who have faith ! do not take your opinions in place of your own , and do not follow in your religion a thing . indeed , it is the thing for you to commit evil , and evil is the result of their deeds .
and when we designated for abraham the place of the house , saying , do not associate with me anything , and purify my house for those who circumambulate it , and those who bow and prostrate themselves .
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
worship none but god . i fear for you the punishment of a painful day .
and indeed we gave musathe scripture , that they may be guided .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
bad women are for bad men , and bad men are for bad women ; good women for good men , and good men for good women ; these are quit of what they say ; for them is forgiveness , and a generous provision .
say : none in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen except allah ; and they do not perceive when they will be raised .
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
o men ! it is you who stand in need of allah , and allah is the free of need , the praiseworthy .
and those who put the day for the first time , and said : o woe to me ! o my people ! it is as the fact that allah has bestowed his bounty on whom he will . and indeed , we have the power to take the right course of the truth , and the disbelievers will not be successful .
and they planned a plan , and we planned a plan , while they perceived not .
and your lord inspired the bee , saying : take you habitations in the mountains and in the trees and in what they erect .
the most gracious , the most merciful .
if you could only see when theyare seized with terror , and there will be no escape for them .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
then the angels called unto him as he stood praying in the sanctuary : verily allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet , and a prophet , and a prophet of the righteous .
and follow the truth for the cause of god , and do not associate others with god in his divinity ; and he who ascribes partners to god is in a blaze .
and scatterfar and wide ;
and indeed this qur ’ an is an advice for the pious .
except in the course of the book , except that the people of the book may say , ‘ we have believed in it , except those who do wrong . and indeed , we have been muslims . ’
that is the true day ; so whoever wills may take to his lord areturn .
the king of men ,
had we wished to take to us a diversion we would have taken it to us from ours had we done so .
we shall provide them in abundance with such fruit and meat as they desire .
the egyptians asked them , if only you areliars .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
as for women past child-bearing who have no hope of marriage , it is no sin on them if they put off their cloaks , without displaying their adornment . but if they restrain themselves it is better for them ; and allah is hearing , knowing .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah – it may be that they will be among the guided .
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
on the day when they behold the angels , there will be no good tidings for the guilty on that day , and they will say : a forbidding ban !
he raised it high and leveled it ,
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears might remember it .
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives ; and allah knows best the godwary .
say to those who do not believe : act according to your ability and act according to our station .
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens underneath which rivers flow . as for the unbelievers , they take their fill of pleasure and eat as cattle eat ; and the fire shall be their lodging .
but those who believed and did good deeds - we charge no soul exceptits capacity . they are the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
and the dwellers on the battlements will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , ‘ your rallying did not avail you , nor what you used to disdain .
and musa said : if ye disbelive , - ye and all those who are on the earth-then verily allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
and we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . so ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
therefore , do not mistreat the orphan .
so allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world ; and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the greatest ; if only they knew !
so be similar to the point of this book , as a kinship or kill the children of israel , as much as their own murder , so that they may have their property , if god had willed , he could not have done so . so leave them , so they will not be able to do it .
or he may cause them to founder for what they have earned , andpardon most ;
is it not enough for them that we have sent down unto thee the book which is recited unto them ? verily herein is a mercy and a reminder unto a people who believe .
there is no animal on land , nor a bird that flies with its two wings , but are communities like you . we have neglected nothing in the book . then to their lord they will be gathered .
he said : put me in charge of the storehouses of the land . lo ! i am a skilled custodian .
were there for us a return , we would be of the believers .
who hears the verses of allah being recited to him , yet persists arrogantly as if he had not heard them . so give him tidings of a painful punishment .
there is no blame on the weak and the sick , and those who find no resources to spend , if they are sincere to allah and his messenger . no groundcan there be against the muhsinun . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
o my father ! worship not satan : for satan is a rebel againstmost gracious .
he causes the night to enter into the day , and the day enter into the night . the day the sun will pass into the night and the day , each shall be its appointed time . such people are the real .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and keep up prayer ; surely prayer keepsaway from indecency and evil ; and the remembrance of allah is the greatest . and allah knows what you do .
woe to every sinful liar ,
and stop them there for questioning :
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
then we produced for you therewith gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
treasures , and graceful dwellings .
and when they are thrown into a narrow place thereof , chained together , they will exclaim therein for destruction .
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
he will rectify your conduct for you and will forgive you your sins . whoever obeys allah and his messenger has indeed achieved a great attainment .
and the true word of religion is true . so the words of those who are steadfast are true . so do not be with any other duty to allah . it is a word revealed to you . it is a word revealed to you .
but when he saw their hands not reaching towards it , he became suspicious of them and conceived a fear of them . they said : fear not , surely we are sent to the people of lot .
by the heaven with its impregnable castles ;
we sent noah to his people . he said , o my people , worship god ; you have no other god but he . i fear for you the punishment of a dreadful day .
this is the result of your deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and whatever is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak to him .
there is no blame on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor any blame on the lame . he who obeys allah and his messenger—he will admit him to gardens beneath which rivers flow . but whoever turns away—he will punish him with a painful punishment .
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
and allah has created that which he created for you in the shade of the garden , and made in it a garment for you , and upon you is their garments , in order that your lord may bestow on you your faces , so that you may be careful ofallah .
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , and then the earth becomes green ? indeed , allah is subtle and acquainted .
when moses said to his family : i perceive a fire . i will bring you news from there , or i will bring you a burning brand that you may warm yourselves .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : cast whateveryou have to cast .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world . but who will plead for them with allah on the day of resurrection , or who will be their pleader ?
on the day when we shall summon every group with their leader ; so whoever is given his record in his right hand , these will read their book , and they will not be wronged a whit .
then a welcome of inferno .
and talk as did the people of old .
and they persecuted them for naught save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
except for an old woman who stayed behind ,
those who remember god , standing , sitting , and on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : lord , thou hast not created this in vain . glory be to thee ! guard us against the chastisement of the fire .
and indeed , it is a reminder for you and your people , and you will soon be questioned .
and they say , “ if the most gracious had willed , we would not have worshipped them. ” they have no knowledge of that ; they are only guessing .
say thou : allah 's is the dominion of the dominion of the heavens and the wisdom . thou wilt give whomsoever thou wilt err , so that thou art of the mighty , the wise .
and a sign for them is the night . we strip off the day from it and they are left in darkness .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
why did they not produce four witnesses ? since they did not bring witnesses , they are liars in the sight of allah .
never did we destroy a population , but had its warners -
allah has created you from dust , then from the right side of the fire . no one can avert the light of him except with his knowledge . it is not the light of him who is in the book , but it is in the presence of allah that it is an easy thing .
a people before you askedand then disbelieved therein .
o you who disbelieve ! make no excuses today ! you are being requited only for what you used to do .
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
and the first of them will say to the last of them , “ you have no advantage over us , so taste the punishment for what you used to earn . ”
what ! when we die and become dust , that is areturn far .
wealth and children are the ornament of this world . but the good deeds which endure are better with your lord for reward , and better for hope .
or have ye a scripture wherein ye learn
we tested solomon , and placed a body on his throne ; then he repented .
say , “ it is the punishment for you . so keep aside from it , and do not follow the sound of them , but when you are worthy to be pure – so when they are worthy to accept it , god does not accept the right path . ”
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
that i might guide you to your lord , so that you should fear him ? '
then he turned quickly to his household , brought out a fatted calf ,
and they say , “ o you who received the message , you are insane . ”
and in the heaven is your provision and what you are promised .
the day that you will see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will discharge her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's chastisement is terrible .
who believe in what has been revealed to you and what was revealed before you , and are certain of the hereafter .
those whom the angels cause to die while they are wronging themselves . then , offer submission : we were not doing any evil . yes , indeed allah knows what you used to do .
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
woe on that day to those who reject the truth !
so set your face towards the right religion before there comes from allah the day which can not be averted . on that day mankind will be sundered-
to moses we gave nine clear signs . ask the children of israel about the clear signs . when he came to them , pharaoh said to him , moses , i think that you are bewitched .
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except for mockery , saying : is this the one who talks of your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the beneficent allah .
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
your lord would never destroy the townships unjustly while their inhabitants were bringing about reform .
there they will have whatever they wish , abiding —a promisebesought , on your lord .
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
indeed this , your religion , is one religion , and i am your lord , therefore worship me .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
it is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war until he has thoroughly decimatedin the land . you desire the transitory gains of this world , but allah desiresthe hereafter . and allah is all-mighty , all-wise .
o my people , give full measure and weight , in all fairness and do not diminish the goods of others , and do not spread corruption in the land .
as for the unbelievers , their riches will not avail them , neither their children , against god ; these are the inhabitants of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
blessed be the name of your lord , majestic , splendid .
we destroyed generations before you when they did wrong . their messengers came to them with clear signs , but they would not believe . thus do we requite the sinful people .
if you lend a good loan to god , he will multiply it for you and forgive you . god is appreciative and forbearing .
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
the day when the trumpet will be blown , and you will come in droves .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
when his lord called to him in the holy valley , towa :
so watch out for the day when the sky will bring a visible smoke .
and whosoever does righteous good deeds , male or female , and is a believer , shall enter paradise , and will not be wronged a whit .
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
when he said to his father , ‘ o my people , i have indeed heard a word . what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you ? what is the matter with you , if you should go astray ? ’
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
when they came to their own , they begin to understand it , or have the right word in them . let them be a pair of their own laws , without the permission of god . he who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds . anyone who fears god and the day of judgment will receive the consequence of their deeds .
on the day when the spirit and the angels stand in ranks , they will not speak except for one whom the most merciful permits , and he will say what is right .
this is how we reward the virtuous .
pharaoh said , if you take any god other than me , i will certainly make you one of thosein prison .
surely the inmates of paradise will be engaged in pastimes .
that is because allah has sent down the book with the truth and those who differ about the book are in extreme dissension .
proceed toward the triple-forked shadow ,
give full measure when you measure , and weigh with a balance that is straight . that is fair and better in the end .
the knower of the invisible and the visible , the great , the high high .
if two men among you commit it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or as you have averred .
o you who believe ! among your wives and your children are enemies to you , so beware of them . but if you pardon and overlook and forgive , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : what ! even though they have power over nothing and have no intelligence ?
secret counsels are onlyof the shaitan that he may cause grief to the believers , but he can not harm them in the least , except by allah 's leave . and in allah let the believers put their trust .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
pharaoh said : and what is the lord of the worlds ?
when he comes to us with the hardship , he calls upon us , or is it to call on them , or , on the contrary , when they are free from the matter , it will be a complete slander for us .
then you , you misguided ones , who deny the truth ,
do you not bring back his soul , if you are truthful ?
and to midian their brother shu'aib . he said : o my people ! serve allah , and fear the last day , and do not act corruptly in the land , making mischief .
from allah , lord of the ways of ascent .
we are your friends in this life and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you call for .
say : 'if what you seek to hasten were with me , the matter between you and me would be decided ; and god knows very well the evildoers . '
it is your lord who drives your ships across the sea that you may seek his bounty . he is indeed most merciful to you .
so the angels prostrated themselves , all of them .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
the chiefs among his people who were faithless said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will indeed be losers . ’
we have already recounted to you what we have forbidden to the jews . we did not wrong them , but they wronged themselves .
and fear the day when you shall be brought back to allah . then every soul shall be paid in full what it has earned , and they shall not be wronged .
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance—they have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
to allah belong both the next world and the present .
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
and why should allah not punish them while they stopfrom al-masjid-al-haram , and they are not its guardians ? only the godwary are its befitting custodians , but most of them do not know .
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : o ye men ! if ye are in doubt as to my religion , theni do not worship those whom ye worship beside allah . but i worship allah who causeth you to die , and i am commanded to be of the believers .
they only follow mere conjecture which can never sufficiently replace the truth .
god is the only lord as the lord of the universe , the living , the everlasting . whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the master of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with him that he has no knowledge of the universe ?
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
and what they used to worship before will forsake them , and they will think that they have no escape .
by the heaven full of paths .
and each one of them will come to him on the day of resurrection alone .
and when they had cast , moses said , what you have brought is sorcery . god will certainly make it fail . god does not foster the efforts of those who do corruption .
those who associated others with allah in his divinity , say : if allah had so willed , they could not have been able to have any place of worship nor could we have worshipped any of them . but allah did not make the example of those who have been concealing .
before them the people of noah , ad , and pharaoh , and he of the tentpegs belied ,
ta sin mim .
nor is it the word of a soothsayer . little is the admonition that you take !
do you not know that to allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth ? he punishes whom he wills and forgives whom he wills . and allah is over all things competent .
lo ! yeand that which ye worship beside allah are fuel of hell : thereunto ye shall go down .
nay , but we are desolate !
have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that it may be that their time has already drawn near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
and on the day when we set the mountains in motion and you see the earth emerging , and we gather them together , leaving none behind .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
we showed him the way , whether he be grateful or ungrateful .
verily , the word of allah is set forth for the messenger of allah , and the needy , their the and the needy , therein , if you are believers in allah , and allah has power over all things .
assuredly allah hath succoured you on many fields , andon the day of hunain , when your multitude elated you , but it availed you naught , and the earth , for all its vastness , constrained you , and ye turned back in retreat .
when our signs are recited to him , he says , legends of the former peoples .
and made of him a pair , the male and female .
i do not worship what you worship ,
and glorify him in the night and after the prayers .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that it is a source of wine for you to drink . this is the law of the truth , and the matter in which a clear law is for the people . this is how god presents the truth for the truth .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
the devils did not bring it down .
do they not know that whoever opposes god and his messenger , will abide in the fire of hell ? that is the supreme disgrace .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
so he went forth among his people in theglitter . those who desired the life of the world said , ‘ we wish we were the like of what korah has been given ! indeed he is very fortunate ! ’
and the heaven we constructed with strength , and indeed , we areexpander .
it is he who created man from water , then gave him consanguinity and affinity . your lord is all-powerful .
and when they hear vain talk , they turn away from it and say : unto us our works , and unto you your works . peace be unto you ! we seek not the ignorant .
and when moses said to his people , “ o my people , why do you give the lie to the coming of the dead while you know ? indeed , i have been the people of the sinners . ”
those who have despaired of the truth will be in speech . if they have any patience , they will have no one to be seen about it . they have the power to do so . this is the law of the law of the past .
tell the believers to forgive those who do not fear the visitations of god , so that he may recompense a people for what they have earned .
we only say that some of our gods have possessed you with evil . he said , i call god to witness , and you are witness that i am clear of what you associate
lo ! verily allah 's is whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is on the earth . and those who invoke beside allah another conjecture , they follow only surmise , and they follow only a guess .
and those who disbelieve say of those who believe : if it had been aught good , they would not have preceded us thereto . and since they are not guided by it , they say : this is an ancient lie .
and do not rebuke the beggar .
holy is he and far above all that they say .
that is for the heavens and the earth , so that it may be the power of the lord of the heavens and the earth , that i may speak to the words of moses , even though i am a clear doer of the pharaoh .
he is the one who accepts the faithless from among the people of the book and the laws of the book , so that it is in the first manner . and they did not tell you about the first time , so it is in the case of allah that they may be guided .
or do you feel secure that he who is in the heaven will not send against you a violent whirlwind ? then you will know the import of my commination !
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whoever does a good deed , it is for his own soul , and whoever does evil , it is against it ; then to your lord you will be returned .
can he against whom the word of punishment has become due… ? can you rescue one who is in the fire ?
have you not seen that allah has full knowledge of all that is in the heavens and the earth ? there is no partnership in the case of allah , the rising of each other 's . there is no changer of worship except him . it is only he who has knowledge of what they have earned ; and he is the most disputatious of all things .
who say , when a misfortune striketh them : lo ! we are allah 's and lo ! unto him we are returning .
when paradise is brought near ,
he who made the earth a habitat for you , and traced in it routes for you ; and sent down water from the sky , with which we bring forth various kinds of vegetation .
he created you from out of dust , then he will bring you back on it , then he will bring you a just son , so that you may be guided , in order that you may be guided .
but if they turn away , then know that allah is your protector - an excellent protector and an excellent helper .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
allah ! there is no god but he , the living , the sustainer .
and if ye follow the word , - the word is your opinion ; and if the one among them should be in the affair , let it be the word of allah . and allah is of that which ye work a witness .
he said , ‘ my lord ! judgewith justice. ’ ‘ our lord is the all-beneficent , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ’
vision comprehends him not , and he comprehendsvision ; and he is the knower of subtleties , the aware .
as such , we never sent a warner before you to a village , but the wealthy among them said , “ we found our parents on a course , and we are following in their footsteps . ”
roasting at a scorching fire ,
those who reject our signs , we shall cast them into a fire . every time their skins are cooked , we shall replace them with new skins so that they may taste the punishment . god is mighty and wise .
it is allah who created the heavens and the earth and sent down rain from the sky and sent down rain for you thereby , and subjected for you the ships in order to sail through the sea , and subjected for you the rivers .
aforetime , as guidance for mankind , and he sent down the criterion . verily , those who disbelieve in the ayatof allah , for them will be a severe torment . allah is mighty , the lord of retribution .
and what will make you know what the crusher is ?
but the wretched will turn away from it .
then , has your lord chosen you forsons and taken from among the angels daughters ? indeed , you utter a monstrous thing !
and those who disbelieve say , why has the quran not been revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart thereby , and we have spaced it distinctly .
they will not believe in it until they see the painful punishment
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
it is god who is the sustainer and the lord of invincible strength .
on a mighty day ,
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
those who have believed and whose hearts are assured by the remembrance of allah . lo ! in the remembrance of allah hearts are assured .
is it a wonder to the people that we revealed to a man from among themselves : 'warn mankind , and bear the glad tidings to those who believe that they stand firm with their lord'the unbelievers say : 'this is a clear sorcerer '
hell , which they willburn , and wretched is the settlement .
o believers , enter the peace , all of you , and follow not the steps of satan ; he is a clear enemy to you .
say , “ the truth is from your lord , so whoever wills may accept the disbelievers , and whoever wills should accept the truth as the disbelievers are . ” what a miserable dwelling !
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
they will not hear its hissing , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
say : has there come unto you the good news of the book with which is sent down unto those who fear , with their lord , theirs shall be gardens whereunder the rivers flow , wherein they shall be abiders ? truly , allah is the beholder of his bondmen .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and deaf , and the seeing and hearing . are they equal in similitude ? will ye not then be admonished ?
god has begotten children . they are liars .
surely he knows what is spoken openly and he knows what you conceal .
it is a written record .
but if the words of allah is better for you , it may be that allah is the best of those who are good for you , so accept the faith of allah , and be careful ofallah , or the women of the polytheists .
send the israelites with us .
but those who strive against our ayatto frustrate them , such will face a painful torment .
it was revealed to you and to those before you that if you associate others with allah in his divinity , your works will surely come to nothing and you will certainly be among the losers .
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the universe . '
if you impugn , thennations have impugnedbefore you , and the apostle ’ s duty is only to communicate in clear terms .
o children of israel ! we have put you in the place of the life of the world in the world to come ; so follow the judgement in the matter of god , and follow the law of the god ; for them is a painful punishment .
o people , if you are in doubt of the earth , then know that we have created you from dust , then make a drop of it , then bring it forth . then , when you have a holy claim , it is open to us that you will be guided .
and , we are indeed going to be in my mother with a painful heart , and the agony of distress shall be brought forth after him : o you , you have been given to me .
it is indeed a conclusive discourse ,
then separate them one from another ,
who is more unjust than one who invents falsehood against god or denies his revelations ? they will say , they have been called to account for what they have done in the life of the world . they will say , “ they have failed to do something , but they are the witnesses of the truth ; they are only aware of it . ”
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs that they should imprison him for a time .
say : 'have you considered the provision allah has sent down for you , and you have made some of it lawful and some unlawful ? ' say : 'has allah given you leave , or do you forge a lie against allah ? '
then we opened the gates of heaven , with water pouring forth .
see how those who were warned met their end !
allah has prepared for them a severe punishment . so fear allah , o men of understanding who have faith ! allah has indeed sent down to you a reminder ,
we have indeed composed his name in the name of allah after it has been revealed to you . after this , we have not revealed to you the way of our lord . it is only for us to make clear to us the religion of our lord . indeed , the best of our lord is the best .
when those who were followed shall disown their followers , and they will see the punishment , and sundered between them will be the cords .
whoever turns away from it will bear a heavy burden on the day of resurrection ,
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
or do they say : we are a host allied together to help each other ?
and if they belie thee , then a party of the followers of the right will be shown unto thee . say thou : there will be no fear with me , nor will ye be able to dispute with me .
and those who follow the speech of the book , shall be inspired in it ; what is revealed to them is only by the command of their lord , and he will make them free from justice , and he will inform them of what they did ; and they are the ones who have faith .
he said , “ i will ask my lord to forgive you ; he is the all-forgiving , the all-merciful . ”
and they thought there would be no punishment , so they became blind and deaf ; then allah turned to them ; then again many of them became blind and deaf . and allah is seeing of what they do .
and they say , “ o you who received the message , you are insane . ”
nor would he order you to take the angels and the prophets for lords . would he order you to infidelity after you have submitted ?
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
verily , we have warned you of a near torment , the day when a man will observe what his hands have sent ahead , and the disbeliever will say , ‘ alas ! would that i were dust ! ’
those they invoke besides him have no power of intercession , except those who testify to the truth and have knowledge .
' o messengers , eat of the good things and do righteousness ; surely i know the things you do .
we recite to you some of the news of musaand fir'aunin truth , for a people who believe .
he has a high position with us and an excellent abode .
and roasting at hell-fire .
the word of the men , to whom belongs the word of god . that is what god has made of their own people , and some of the women to be given a share of their wealth . this is what god has revealed to them . they are the ones who have fear of god .
and those who take protectors besides him , allah is hafizover them , and you are not a keeper over them .
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger evidently had come to them ,
, you were certainly in unmindfulness of this . we have removed from you your cover , so your sight today is sharp .
and they used to persist in the great sin .
they ask you to hasten the punishment . god will not break his promise . a day with your lord is like a thousand years in your reckoning .
do they seek other than the religion of allah , while to him submitted whosoever is in the heavens and the earth , willingly or unwillingly , and to him they will be returned ?
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
he will teach him the book and wisdom , the torah and the gospel ,
we send the messengers only to give good news and to warn . so those who believe and reform themselves need have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
what , is he who has created the way of god to be fear of god ? he who is better guided than the will of god , who will be condemned by the fire . god does not guide the arrogant people .
to whoever of you wills to go straight .
and if they believe in the like of that which ye believe , then are they rightly guided ; but if they turn back , then they are in schism , and allah will suffice thee against them , and he is the hearer , the knower .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
who created you proportionately and fashioned you
those on the right—what of those on the right ?
said : o iblis ! what is your reason for not being among those who prostrated themselves ?
and indeed , we have destroyed your likes , then is there any that will remember ?
except for he who will be roasting in hell .
then who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is in the name of allah to be mentioned in it , whose aim is to be taken in his name ? they will have a great punishment in this world , but they will have a great punishment in the world to come .
he said , “ the refuge of the people of the heights is to accept the – in this the qur ’ an . he said , ‘ no one can be rewarded from allah ’ s punishment , nor was he of those whom allah has chosen . ’
he said : o my people ! lo ! i am a plain warner unto you
they said : nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they keep disputing .
and he will conclude that it wasof parting ;
have they taken intercessors besides allah ? say : what ! even though they have power over nothing and have no intelligence ?
believers , do not ask about things about which it could be revealed to you . if you ask about such things , they will receive your repentance . god has exempted you . he is all-forgiving and forbearing .
those before them also denied the truth , so the punishment came upon them from where they did not perceive .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
those -- their recompense is forgiveness from their lord , and gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; how excellent is the wage of those who labour !
and whoever is opposed to allah , be patient , and be dutiful to him ; this is better , for the lord of the book , so that you may be of the losers .
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
say : it is not in my power to cause you harm , or to bring you to the right way .
we alone know who deserves most to be burned therein .
they will say , woe to us ! who has raised us up from our sleeping-place ? this is what the most merciful had promised , and the messengers spoke the truth .
unloose the knot upon my tongue ,
god has made the light light which he has made a light for the welfare of men and the birds as well as the adornment of the people and the birds . this is what god has created in the heavens and the earth . god has knowledge of all things .
that is because they followed that which angereth allah , and hated that which pleaseth him . therefor he hath made their actions vain .
the devils did not bring it down .
and follow not the command of al-musrifun ,
that is because allah merges the night into the day , and he merges the day into the night ; and because allah is hearing , seeing .
their protection during their trading caravans in the winter and the summer --
then you will all be raised on the day of resurrection .
by the fig and the olive ,
he said , “ because you have lured me , i will waylay them on your straight path . ”
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
so that allah may separate the bad from the good , and put the wickedone on another , heap them together , and cast them into hell . it is they who are the losers .
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
and i seek refuge in thee , my lord , lest they be present with me .
those before them also denied the truth , and these have not attained one-tenth of what we had given them . yet they rejected my messengers , so how was my rebuttal !
how will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs ?
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
and the magicians flung themselves prostrate ,
o muhammad ! call on the call of allah , the reward of what is with me , and no reward is with allah ; and i do not ask you any reward for it ; indeed , you are to allah , but most surely i am a manifest adversary .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world . but who will plead for them with allah on the day of resurrection , or who will be their pleader ?
in which he will neither die nor live therein .
so that we may glorify you much
were there for us a return , we would be of the believers .
to show me the treasures of god . i speak the words of god . i speak the words of god . he is the best knower of what is in their hearts . god is well aware of what is in their hearts .
and whatever things you have been given are only the wares of the life of this world and its glitter , and whatever is with allah is better and more lasting . will you not then understand ?
and my breast straiteneth , and my tongue moveth not quickly : so send for harun .
and allah propoundeth for two men the similitude of a party of them , a place of similitude : for any of them there is a duty unto thee ; so is he unto whom belongeth a message like unto him ? so shall he be admonished , - that he may be ?
enjoin prayer on your people , and be steadfast in maintaining it . we do not ask you for any sustenance . it is we who give you sustenance , and theend is for guarding .
say , ‘ o my people ! act according to your ability ; indeed , i am working . soon you will know in whose favour the outcome of that abode will be . indeed the wrongdoers will not be felicitous . ’
the chiefs of the people of fir'aunsaid : this is most surely a skillful magician ,
when the earth is stretched out
and remember when you were few , abased in the land , fearing that people may abduct you ; but he sheltered you , supported you with his help , and provided you with good things that you may be thankful .
we know what the earth diminishes from them , and with us is a preserving book .
has therecome upon man a period of time when he was not a thingmentioned ?
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
he said : o my people ! there is no error in me , but i am a messenger from the lord of the worlds .
that we might make it a reminder for you , and that receptive ears might remember it .
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
so let them laugh a little andweep much as recompense for what they used to earn .
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
and by the night when it withdraws ,
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
and to us belong the last and the first .
and when they see you , they take you for nothing but mockery : “ is this the one whom allah has sent as amessenger ? ”
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and the stupor of death will come in truth : this is what you have been avoiding !
and man saith : when i am dead , shall i then be brought forth alive ?
and neither stand up nor defend themselves .
whose eyes were covered from my remembrance , and they were not able to hear .
those , their abode will be the fire because of what they used to earn .
that he may reward those who believe and do good out of his bounty ; surely he does not love the unbelievers .
a servantwhen he prays ?
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
until the day of the time appointed . ”
do you lust after men instead of women ? you are indeed a stolid people .
people ask you concerning the hour . say , ‘ it is only allah who has knowledge of it . what do you know ? maybe the hour is near . ’
ora treasure sent down to him , or he has had a garden from which to eat ? the wrongdoers say , you are only following a man bewitched .
among thornless lote-trees
standall night , except a little .
in our eyes they were of the chosen , virtuous people .
those of the children of israel who were bent on denying the truth were cursed by david and jesus , the son of mary , because they disobeyed and were insolent .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
you will never attain piety until you spend of what you love ; and whatever thing you spend , god knows it well .
o my father ! lo ! i fear lest a penalty afflict thee frommost gracious , so that thou become a comrade of the devil .
but the shout seized them in the morning ,
not so lblis . he grew stiffnecked and became of the infidels .
those before them said it , yetthat they had earned availed them not ;
indeed the pious are amidst gardens and springs .
we are removing the punishment a little , but you revert .
and allah encompasses them from behind ! .
allah invites to the home of peace , and he guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
there is no way for a believer , except to a believer ; but if a man is faithful , he is a believer , a man of pure faith . but if a man is to believe in him , then he is a muhsin . but if he is a muslim , then it is a true command .
and become dust dispersing .
allah , your lord and the lord of your forefathers ?
nor shade and heat
and ask forgiveness of your lord , and then repent unto him . lo ! my lord is merciful , loving .
see how they strike examples for you . they have gone astray and can not find the right way .
the lord of the heavens and the earth , and whatever is between them , the most beneficent , none can dare to speak to him .
we shall certainly make the unbelievers suffer severe torment and will fully requite their deeds .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives ; and allah knows best the godwary .
they said , by god , you are still in your old error .
those before them plotted , but allah struck at the foundations of their building , and then the roof fell down upon them from above them , and the chastisementvisited them from directions they did not perceive .
your lord will decide between them by his judgement . he is all-mighty and all-knowing .
in his place they invoke only females ; and theycall upon none but a rebellious satan .
what is promised will surely come to pass .
indeed , those who have believed and migrated and strove for the cause of allah with their own wealth and their lives - those are they who have made their allies in the way of allah . those who have emigrated and made their allies in the way of allah , they are indeed the ones who have no faith in you . allah is the seer of what you do .
said : o my people ! if i have been guided to the right way from my lord , and hold fast to him , and be with him , they will be brought aright .
they will not hear its hissing , and they will abide in that which their souls desire .
he said : have you then considered what you have been worshipping ,
allah created you ; then he causes you to die ; and some of you will be brought back to an extremely old age , so that they may know nothing after having acquired knowledge ; surely allah is all-knowing , all-powerful .
we have sent you forth as a bearer of glad news and a warner to all mankind , but most people do not know .
or , anything are they , a great thing at the cost of it . they say , “ who is it that will revive him ? ” say , “ when will he bring it back ? ” say , “ when will be the resurrection ? ”
so when you are free work diligently ,
or , anything are they , a great thing at the cost of it . they say , “ who is it that will revive him ? ” say , “ when will he bring it back ? ” say , “ when will be the resurrection ? ”
then as for him who is given his book in his right hand ,
then they turned away from him and said , taughta madman .
true sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
appoint for me a minister from my family ,
and dutecus unto my mother , and hath not made me high- handed , unblest .
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
when allah made a covenant with the people of the book to make it known to mankind and not conceal it . they cast it behind their backs and sold it for a small price . evil indeed is their bargain .
so go ye twain unto fir'awn and say : verily we are the apostles of the lord of the worlds ,
yes , whoever fulfills his commitments and is wary of allah—allah indeed loves the godwary .
o ye who believe ! be ye disbelievers in allah 's way , as the name of allah : isa son of mary , isa son of mary : ‘ who is it that will be a sign to allah , so that we may be the rejectors of the believers ? then , we have made them a harvestreaped , so that they became a tyrant .
they ask you what they should spend , say : whatever good you spend is for parents and kinsmen , orphans and the needy , and the traveller ; whatever good you may do , god is aware of it .
then we facilitated . how well do we calculate !
thus we relate to you the history of past events , and we have given you a reminderfrom us .
what , is he who has created the way of god to be fear of god ? he who is better guided than the will of god , who will be condemned by the fire . god does not guide the arrogant people .
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
and they say , none shall enter paradise unless he be a jew or a christian . these are their wishful fancies . say , produce your proof , if you are truthful .
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind , and if an affliction visits you , they say : allah was gracious to me that i was not present with them .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
say : 'what think you ? if god 's chastisement comes upon you , or the hour comes upon you , will you call upon any other than god , if you are truthful ? '
it is allah who has subjected the sea for you so that ships may sail upon it by his command , and that you may seek of his bounty , and that you may be grateful .
and verily thy lord knoweth whatsoever their breasts conceal and whatsoever they make known .
indeed , the righteous will be among gardens and rivers ,
and when you strike , you strike mercilessly ?
and a sign for them is the night . we strip off the day from it and they are left in darkness .
verily allah and his angels send their benedictions upon the prophet . o ye who believe ! send your benedictions upon him and salute him with a goodly salutation .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found not for themselves besides allahhelpers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
and can not give them help , nor can they help themselves ?
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
no one but the sinners led us astray .
that wherewith they were contented naught availeth them ?
he said , “ o my people , you have given us a book in which you are law , and who can be able to do so , and who can help me from allah ? ” and i do not make the command of him , except to be trusted .
who fed them against hunger , and secured them against fear .
then you turned away after that ; and were it not for the grace of allah and his mercy , you would have been among the losers .
so when she came , it was said : is your throne like this ? she said : it is as it were the same , and we were given the knowledge before it , and we were submissive .
and what will make you realize what the sure calamity is !
has the news not reached you , of those who disbelieved before ? they tasted the evil consequences of their conduct , and for them is a painful punishment .
they plotted against him , but we made them the lowest .
and at night . do you not understand ?
he said : enter the course of the jinn and the people of the fire . when they are told , ‘ our lord ! make them enter the fire . ’ then , when they are , behold , they will be among the lowest .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them who disbelieved .
say : ' i have come to you with what your lord has revealed to you , and do not follow the tradition of your lord , for you have been doing good . do not be afraid of the things you have done , and do not be among the doubters .
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
our provision for you will never be exhausted .
and lo ! my curse is on thee till the day of judgment .
am i not better than this contemptible man who can barely express himself ?
an insight and a reminder for every bondman penitent .
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good tidings and warners . and those who disbelieve dispute with false argument , in order to rebut the truth with it , and they take my signs and that of which they are warned .
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
and the astray follow the poets .
recite : and thy lord is the most generous ,
and reckon not thou those slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ,
do you build a monument on every height for vanity 's sake ?
the dwelling of suchis hell , and they will find no way of escape from it .
why do you not bring down the angels upon us , if you are truthful ?
no ! indeed , they do not fear the hereafter .
and be patient under the judgement of your lord , for surely you are before our eyes . and celebrate the praise of your lord when you rise ,
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
his companion will say : our lord ! i did not make him transgress , but he wasfar astray .
the day it comes no soul will speak except by his permission . some will be wretched and others blessed .
and forgive my father , for he is one of those astray .
most surely the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
when we will a thing we have only to say : be , and it is .
and those whom they call upon beside allah have not created anything , and are themselves created .
and lower your wing to the believers who follow you .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
indeed they had plotted sedition before , and upset matters for you , until the truth came and the ordinance of allah appeared , though they were averse .
and thathis striving shall soon be seen ,
and the prayer is open to the people , when the time of the time to come ; then if they have gone forth , then do not give the money , and do not give the alms , and do not give the alms ; and then , if any of you were to be given to it , then do not give the zakat , and that the reward of the muslims is to be witnessed .
for those who believe and do good works is an enduring wage '
and unto allah prostrateth itself whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth of the living , and the angels , and they are not stiff-necked .
and i will give them respite . my plan is firm .
and indeed we gave musathe scripture , that they may be guided .
so these their habitations lie deserted now because of their iniquities . verily in this is a sign for people who know .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
what aileth you that ye are two parties regarding the hypocrites , when allah cast them backbecause of what they earned ? seek ye to guide him whom allah hath sent astray ? and whomsoever allah sendeth astray , for him thoucanst not find a way .
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
do you then hope that they will believe in you , while a party of them used to hear the word of allah and then altered it after they had understood it ?
make not the calling of the messengeramong you as your calling of one another . god knows those of you who slip away their affair , and let those who go against his command beware , lest a trial befall them , or there befall them a painful chastisement .
when we decide to destroy a town , we command its affluent ones , but they commit evil in it , so the word becomes due against it , and we destroy it utterly .
he said , “ if god were to extend any one of you , then do you deny the others with whom you are ruined ? you are not at all as a sign for your forefathers ; and you are waiting with god . ”
say : o my people ! act according to your ability ; i am acting . soon you will know
they will say , “ we remained a day , or part of a day ; but ask those who keep count . ”
have you not seen those who have received a portion of the book ? they are invited to the book of allah that it may judge between them , then a party of them turns away , and they are refusing .
ta sin mim .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
but those whose scales are light will be those who have lost their souls , in hell will they abide .
a guidance and mercy for the righteous ,
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
they said : our lord ! we have wronged ourselves . if thou forgive us not and have not mercy on us , we shall be of the lost .
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
then the angels called unto him as he stood praying in the sanctuary : verily allah announceth unto thee yahya confessing to a word from allah , and a prophet , and a prophet , and a prophet of the righteous .
reclining on beds lined with silk brocade , the fruits of the gardens near to hand .
she said , “ when kings enter a town , they devastate it , and make the mightiest of its people the weakest . thus do they do .
however , those who turn away and disbelieve ,
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth , and to him belongs the enduring religion . will you then fear anyone other than god ?
said , lord , i have power over none but myself and my brother ; so separate us from the disobedient people .
white , delicious for the drinkers .
she said , ‘ i seek the protection of the all-beneficent from you , should you be godwary . ’
andconfirming what was before me of the torah and to make lawful for you some of the things that were forbidden to you . i have come to you with a sign from your lord so fear allah and obey me .
ah , what will convey unto thee what the ascent is ! -
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
that is because allah , he is the truth , and what they invoke besides him is nullity , and because allah is the all-exalted , the all-great .
when moses said to his people , ‘ o my people ! indeed , you are the ones who did not know . so go back to him , and be careful ofhim , and he is the just one who hears all and is merciful . ’
have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do ?
they will not hear any unnecessary or sinful talk
and indeed we bestowed grace on david from us : o you mountains , sing the praises of allah with him , and we made iron soft for him .
noble scribes
and fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there shall be no aggression except against the oppressors .
or to a needy person in misery ;
and by oath of the soul and by oath of him who made it proper .
corruption has appeared on land and sea because of what people ’ s hands have earned , that they may taste a part of what they have done , in order that they may return .
lo ! those who dispute with us concerning the revelations , they dispute about allah 's revelations . they are not the ones to argue on account of it . they are the ones who take heed for themselves . so allah is the hearer , the seer .
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
when we sent to them two messengers , they denied them both , so we reinforced them with a third . they said , “ we have been sent towards you . ”
so remember me , i will remember you . be thankful to me and do not be ungrateful .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
until you visit the graves .
set not up with allah any other godlest thou sit down reproved , forsaken .
and inform them that the water is to be shared between them , eachdrink attended .
call on your lord humbly and secretly . he does not love the transgressors .
and the wife of pharaoh said : a consolation for me and for thee . slay him not , perhaps he may be of benefit to us , or we may adopt him as a son . and they perceived not .
we sent messengers to other nations before you , and we seized them with suffering and hardship so that they might humble themselves .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
and those who took their wealth for the cause of god in the world to come , they shall have the burden of their own good , and their own souls to be given to them , their share is with them ; and those who are godfearing , they are the successful .
they will wish to come forth from the fire , but they will not come forth from it ; and for them is a lasting punishment .
and when thou lookest them thou shalt behold delight and a dominion magnificent .
o children of israel ! we have put you in the place of the life of the world in the world to come ; so follow the judgement in the matter of god , and follow the law of the god ; for them is a painful punishment .
neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against god . they are the inmates of the fire , therein dwelling forever .
the time of reckoning has drawn near for mankind , yet they are heedless and turn away .
he said : have you then considered what you have been worshipping ,
who whispers into the hearts of men ,
say , “ my prayer and my worship , and my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the creation . ”
it is he who pusheth away the orphan ,
is it not a sign to them that the learned scholarsof the children of israel knew it ?
he is god in the heavens and the earth . he knows your secrets and your utterance . he knows what you earn .
they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and the hereafter , and they will have no helpers .
and not one of you could have held us off from him .
so we took vengeance on them . the two of them were on a roadway manifest .
and multiplied therein corruption .
soloman 's army , consisting of human beings , jinn , and birds , were gathered together in his presence ,
what , has the reminder been sent down to him out of all of us ? ' nay , but they are in doubt concerning my remembrance ! nay , but they have not yet tasted my chastisement !
most surely this is a manifest trial .
and allah is knower of your enemies ; and sufficient is allah as a wali , and allah is sufficient as a supporter .
had we revealed it to a nonarab ,
then is he who knows that what has been revealed to you from your lord is the truth like one who is blind ? only those who possess intellect take admonition
, we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
we have sent before you messengers , among them , in which there is a lesson for them ; but there are no doubt that they are in respect of it ; and the command is only with allah ; then they will be losers .
and the morning as it lights up .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said ; and he was high in the sight of allah .
and we decreed for the children of israel in the book : 'you shall corrupt the land twice , and you will ascend exceeding high . '
full of overhanging branches --
they will reclineon thrones arranged in ranks . and we shall marry them to houriswith wide lovely eyes .
if any of the boys were arrogant , he is not a servant of his own ; but if they are a righteous , it is only for a good deed ; and if they are righteous , it is only a few that will be righteous .
they shall be rewarded by their lord , gardens of bliss , wherein they will live forever . they will abide therein forever . these are the people of the right direction .
thamud deniedby reason of their transgression ,
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be their everlasting home , as recompense for what they used to deny our ayat .
and they say , “ when will this promise be , if you are truthful ? ”
whoever desires the harvest of the hereafter , we will give him increase in his tillage ; and whoever desires the harvest of this world , we give him of it , and in the hereafter he will have no share .
and among them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are oblivious of the hereafter .
and the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that permission may be given to them and those who lied to allah and his messenger sat at home ; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of them who disbelieved .
when the lote-tree was covered with that which covered it .
except iblis ; he refused to be among those who prostrated .
so whoever wills , shall remember it .
he said , “ what is the matter with you that when you take joseph ’ s secret , and said , ‘ peace ! ’ he said , ‘ this is what i used to do . ’ he said , ‘ it is indeed a clear prophesy . ’
we made the mountains join him in glorifying us at sunset and sunrise ;
the likeness of the two parties is that of a two male point . the two . the matter is true . so , your father , is true . it was the true news of the truth that you have received .
say : 'what , do you disbelieve in him who created the earth in two days , and do you set up equals with him ? that is the lord of the universe . '
by the loosed ones successively
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
indeed , those who have believed and migrated and strove for the cause of allah with their own wealth and their lives - those are they who have made their allies in the way of allah . those who have emigrated and made their allies in the way of allah , they are indeed the ones who have no faith in you . allah is the seer of what you do .
of jinn and men . '
eat and drink pleasantly for what you did ,
beside him . socircumvent me , all of you , give me no respite .
moses said : say youabout the truth when it has come to you ? is this magic ? but sorcerers do not prosper .
among the people are some who are bent on denying the truth , and reject the path of god . what is revealed to him is the word of god . it is they who are the people of understanding .
who taught by the pen ,
those against whom the word has become due will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray , so we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
taught man what he did not know .
destroying everything by its lord ’ s command. ’ so they became such that nothing could be seen except their dwellings . thus do we recompense the guilty lot .
they did not forbid each other from committing the abominable deeds they committed . indeed evil was that which they used to do .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
and they say what they do not do ?
each man will have enough cares that day .
they will say : glory be to thee ! no one can be sent to us except thou , or the one , or the other one , or the other
there is no soul but has a protector over it .
and they say what they do not do ?
those who believe and do good deeds , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
eight pairs , a pair of sheep and two of goats . say : has he forbidden the two males or the two females , or what the wombs of the two females contain ? inform me with knowledge if you are truthful .
those who disbelieved said to their messengers , “ we will expel you from our land , unless you return to our religion. ” and their lord revealed to them : “ we will destroy the wrongdoers . ”
and among those who are jews , speaking the word , they speak to their own laws , saying , ‘ we hear , , ’ , and do not listen . but if they were to say , ‘ we have indeed heard , so that we may be wary . ’
andthe day when we will gather from every nation a company of those who denied our signs , and they will be kept in ranks , -
those are they of whom allah knows what is in their hearts ; so turn aside from them , and admonish them , and speak to them effectual words concerning themselves .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and keep up prayer ; surely prayer keepsaway from indecency and evil ; and the remembrance of allah is the greatest . and allah knows what you do .
were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
and vie with the others ;
the disbelieving assembly of his nation said : 'this is but a human being like you . he wants to be superior to you . had god wanted , he would have sent down angels . we never heard of this from our forefathers .
except what allah wills . indeed , he knows the open and what is hidden .
said moosa , “ o haroon – what prevented you when you saw them going astray ? ”
but if you desire allah and his messenger and the abode of the hereafter , then indeed allah has prepared for the righteous among you a great reward .
and he brought down from their forts , the people of the book who supported them from their fortresses and cast terror into their hearts , so that some you killed and others you took captive .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
and they say , “ when will this promise be fulfilled , if you are truthful ? ”
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
but when the deafening noise comes to pass .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and withhold things of common use .
that is the recompense of the enemies of allah : the fire will be their everlasting home , as recompense for what they used to deny our ayat .
and assuredly we have vouchsafed unto thee seven of the repetitions and the mighty qur'an .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
they said , “ our lord , we fear that he may oppress us or deal mischievously . ”
and the lord of the two easts and the people of the throne , to whom belongs the dominion of the two and to the latter ; and he had made clear to the words of the children of israel , because of what they used to do .
perish the hands of abilahab , and perish he !
when the trumpet blast is sounded they will come out of their graves and hasten to their lord .
and when they repented and saw that they had gone astray , they said : 'if our lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall be among the losers . '
or , who is it that there is no other god besides him ? when he calls upon them , he will say to them : what ! do you then deny the truth ?
do they then feel secure against the plan of allah ? but none feels secure from allah 's plan except thoseto ruin !
he is the omnipotent over his slaves , and he is the all-wise , the all-aware .
which none but sinners eat .
the people of noah deniedbefore them , andthe dwellers at ar-rass andthamud ,
when the trumpet is blown with a single blast
say : ' i am on clear evidence from my lord , yet you deny him . i do not have that for which you are impatient . the decision is only for allah . he narrates the truth and he is the best of deciders '
and we made a portion of what allah has created of property and of the fruits , and they said : “ this is allah ’ s behalf who are the most merciful . so he who fabricates a lie against allah – so what an evil judgement they impose !
and of every thing we have created pairs , that haply ye may reflect .
they say , ‘ what ! is it the sign of the clear one among the signs of allah ? ’ say , ‘ yes , indeed , the signs of the clear book is . ’ it is said , ‘ indeed , it is a clear prophesy . ’
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
a lying , sinful forelock .
whereas they disbelieved in it before , guessing at the unseen from a place far away .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering upon them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is forgiving and merciful .
and will abide under this burden for ever . evil will be their burden on the day of resurrection .
and the morning as it lights up .
and i am not going to drive away the believers .
and keep away from ar-rujz !
what ! when we die and become dust , that is areturn far .
then paradise is the shelter .
who are lost in deception .
shall he who has created not know ? and he is the all-attentive , the all-aware .
and those who guard their private parts
and among us are the righteous , and among us arenot so ; we weredivided ways .
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
and if it is the book of the people of the book and the disbelievers who have been sent by the tongue of allah , they say : is it not that the signs of our signs should be recited to those who have faith ? in fact , the qur'an is a manifest prescription for those who have no faith .
had they believed and been righteous , the reward from god would have been better , if they only knew .
exalted is allah above what they describe ,
so the earthquake seized them , and morning found them in their habitation fallen prostrate .
and of his signs are the night and the day , and the sun and the moon . do not prostrate before the sun and the moon , but prostrate to allah who created them , if it is him that you worship .
it is not for us to have , because we have given the revelation to their people , which they had devised , but they were not . we have given them a reminderfrom them . but they do not have faith .
and ishmael , elisha , jonah and lot-each one we preferred above all beings ;
and when mankind are gatheredwill become enemies for them , and will become deniers of their worship .
man was created of haste . i will show you my signs , so do not ask me to hasten .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
say , the truth has come , and falsehood can neither beginnor repeat .
so let man consider of what he was created .
say , ‘ whoever is in error , the all-beneficent will prolong his home , until they sight what they had been promised , or the hour. ’ then they will know who is worst in position and who is weaker in hosts .
surely the pious shall be in bliss ,
he certainly saw the greatestof the existence of his lord .
and to everyone we have appointed heirs of what parents and relatives leave behind . and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give their share . allah is witness to all things .
but whoever turns away from my reminder , for him is a confined life , and we will raise him on the day of resurrection blind . ”
then seest thou any of them left surviving ?
and how many a city was stronger than your citywhich drove you out ? we destroyed them , and there was no helper for them .
and when the noble messenger from allah has come to them , they will be held accountable for them ; and he knows what they have before , and the disbelievers had already rejected the truth . so , let the disbelievers be cursed by the disbelievers .
in a lofty garden ,
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i have only one . he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
but they were not sent to be guardians over them .
are the people of the townships then secure from the coming of our wrath upon them by night while they are asleep ?
and we did not sendbefore you except as men to whom we revealed . so ask the people of the reminder if you do not know .
so hallow thou the praise of thy lord , and be thou of the prostrate .
and thus do we explain the ayatin detail , that haply they may return .
if you are bent on denying the truth , god will certainly grant you no need , but if you are bent on denying the truth , he will not be pleased with you , but if you are rightly guided , it is only to your lord . he has the knowledge of all the eye .
when our verses are recited to him , he says , ‘ myths of the ancients ! ’
they said , “ you are only human beings like ourselves ; the merciful has not sent down anything ; you are only lying . ”
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto daud and sulaiman a knowledge , and they said : praise be to allah , who hath preferred us above many of his believing slaves !
so , o dear prophet , when we have said to the people , “ your lord knows the people and what you have observed , and it is made for you to follow the people in peace , and it is the same for you to have no faith . ”
as for the likeness of those they say , they are the ones who say : 'here , in the course of the book , that is the book ; that which is the book shall be in the book . that is the law of allah , and they will not be able to invent lies .
and reckon not thou those slain in the way of allah as dead . nay , they are aliveare provided sustenance from their lord ,
and we rained on them a rain . and evil was the rain of those who had been warned .
and fulfil the covenant of allah when ye have covenanted , and break not your oaths after they have been confirmedfor ye have made allah a surety over you . lo ! allah knoweth what ye do .
andabraham , when he said to his people : worship allah and fear him . that is better for you if you only knew .
murmuring among themselves : “ you have lingered only for ten . ”
the intercession of the intercessors shall then be of no avail to them .
does man think that he will be left alone to himself , free ?
that is their requital—hell—because of their unfaith and for deriding my signs and apostles .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
and that certainly our armies will be victorious .
it is he who has made the earth for you as a dwelling , and made for you the like of it . it is the like of the heavens and the earth . it is the same for you , so that you may worship god alone .
so leave them alone until they encounter that day of theirs , wherein they shallswoon , -
and we inspired moses , saying : take away my slaves by night , for you will be pursued .
those who believe in allah and the last day do not ask you for leavefrom waging jihad with their possessions and their lives ; and allah knows best the godwary .
most surely the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
and when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave as those before them asked permission . thus does allah make clear to you his communications , and allah is knowing , wise .
we said , “ go down from it , all of you ; but if there comes to you guidance from me , then whoever follows my guidance—they have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
so those who believe in allah and hold fast to him , he will admit them to his mercy and grace , and guide them to himself on a straight path .
by allah , we have sent messengers before you to other nations . but satan made their deeds seem attractive to them , so he is their patron today , and they will have a painful punishment .
their account falls only upon my lord , were you but aware .
say thou : thou art a wizard open ; we speak the word of the people on the heights ; so the word shall be in the heaven , if it be the word of these people .
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an , in order that they may receive admonition , but it only increased their aversion .
and do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best manner , until he reaches maturity . and fulfillcommitment . indeed , the covenant will be asked about .
we created man from an extract of clay .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
the faithful spirit has brought it down
they even solicited of him his guests , but we obliterated their eyes : 'now , taste my punishment and my warnings '
or that he will not seize them in their going to and fro , so that they can not escape ?
how ? if they prevail against you they will respect neither kinship nor covenant . they satisfy you with their tongues , but their hearts refuse to you , and most of them are wicked .
that is because you made a mockery of allah 's communications and were deluded by the life of the world . so today they will not be brought forth from it , nor will they be suffered to make amends .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
this is because your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were unaware .
those who believe fight in the cause of allah , and those who disbelieve fight in the cause of taghut . so fight the friends of satan ; indeed the stratagems of satan are weak .
it could be that those who disbelieve will wish that they had been muslims .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
say : nothing will happen to us except what allah has decreed for us ; he is our protector ; and on allah let the believers rely .
when he said to his father and his people : what are these images to which you are devoutly clinging ?
and all those on earth .
so fear allah , keep your duty to him , and obey me .
and know that he has made known to you all that is in your hands , but allah has believed in him . so he has prepared for you a way , so that the disbelievers might be made manifest .
the repentant , the worshippers , the praisers , the travelers , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and keep the ordinances of allah .
we know those of you who have gone before and those who will come after you .
we have sent it down on a blessed night
the story of among the people of the present book is a narration . the tongue of the book is revealed to them . the words of god is true . the words of god is true . they say : god has the knowledge of the unseen .
and noah had certainly called us , andthe best of responders .
and we taught him the making of coats of mail for you , to protect you from yourviolence . will you then be grateful ?
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
is the one who knows all that is in the hands of their own book ? they have set different groups with god . say , “ bring it upon those who have rejected the truth , and say , “ bring it upon those who are bent on denying the truth . god has the knowledge of the disbelievers . ”
by god , i shall have a plan for your statues after you have gone away and turned your backs .
it is god who is the only lord . he is the only lord , to be devoted to his own good , and to be devoted to the believers . the final reward is for the pagans .
they will say , “ our lord ! whoever has brought this calamity upon us – double the punishment of the fire for him ! ”
and not known my account !
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god besides him ; otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would assuredly have overcome others . glory be to god , above that they describe !
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and assuredly we sent musa with our signs unto fir'awn and his chiefs , and he said : verily i am an apostle of the lord of the worlds .
the men of believing women , men and women alike , both men and women , and men , women , and women -- and men , women , and women -- both men , women , and women -- surely , we have given them a mighty wage , from god , a great reward .
an efreet of the jinns said : i will bring it to thee before thou rise from thy place ; verily i am strong and trusty for it .
even if every sign should come to them , until they see the painful punishment .
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
he said , “ if you follow me , do not ask me about anything , until i myself make mention of it to you . ”
that is the bounty of allah , which he bestows on whom he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and verily it is a revelation of the lord of the worlds .
so travel freelyfor four monthsthroughout the land , and know that you can not escape allah , and that allah will disgrace the disbelievers .
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god is witness to what they do .
and assuredly he saw him at another descent .
he said : your lord and the lord of your fathers , the ancients .
but he denied and flouted .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah hath sealed . and such are the heedless .
allah will judge between you on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ .
and they make the jinn associates with allah , while he created them ; and they attribute to him sons and daughters , without any knowledge . glory be to him ! high be he exalted above what they describe !
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
from the evil of the blowers on knots ;
those they invoke themselves seek the means of access to their lord , which of them will be nearest , and they hope for his mercy and fear his punishment . indeed , the punishment of your lord is to be feared .
and how the mountains were firmly fixed ?
he said : did i not tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me ?
did they enjoin this upon one another ? in fact , they are a rebellious people .
jonah too was one of the envoys ;
god does not forbid you to deal kindly and justly with those who have not fought against you on account of religion and did not drive you out of your homes . god loves the just .
but those who had been given knowledge said : woe to you ! the reward of allah is better for him who believeth and doeth right : but none will attain it except the patient .
after them we raised a new generation .
they set apart for what they do not know a portion of that which we have provided them . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
thus they were overcome and made to look abiect .
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
sovereign of the day of recompense .
those who do not believe in the hereafter give angels the names of females ,
your lord has not forsaken you , nor has he detested .
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
o my people , enter the holy land which allah has prescribed for you , and do not turn backandbecome losers .
there is no blame on you for seeking bounty from your lord . but when you disperse from 'arafat , remember allah at al- mash'ar al-haram . and remember him as he has guided you . indeed , you were before that among those astray .
and moses said : my lord knows best who has come with guidance from him , and for whom will be the happy abode .
and on that day we shall leave them surging on one another , and the trumpet will be blown , and we shall gather them all together .
then if they are patient , the fire is their abode , and if they ask for goodwill , then they are not of those who are allowed to appease .
indeed , he had shown the clear signs to you , in order to find the way of attaining faith . but they have been in doubt as to what they have been sent as messenger . then , you will never be in doubt as to the righteous .
save him who may eavesdrop , and then a bright flame pursues him .
to allah belong both the next world and the present .
the word of god is true , and he establishes religion in his religion , and do not follow the tradition of god , and keep your duty to him , and give the alms ,
they are planning a scheme ,
that is because they say , the fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days . and the false beliefs which they have fabricated have deluded them in their religion .
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
then he fashioned him in due proportion , and breathed into him something of his spirit . and he gave you hearing , sightand hearts . little do you thank .
and mention in the book ishmael ; he was true to his promise , and he was a messenger , a prophet .
say thou : whose is the earth and whosoever is therein ? if ye know !
an arabic quran , without any deviance that they might become righteous .
how many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind ,
and your lord proclaimed , “ pray to me , i will respond to you ; but those who are too proud to worship me will enter hell forcibly . ”
he said , “ our lord is he who gave everything its natural form and directed it . ”
so they accused them of falsehood , and they became of those who were destroyed .
they said : o nuh ! you have disputed with us and lengthened dispute with us . now bring upon us what you threaten us with , if you should be of the truthful .
they will swear to you in order to please you . but even if you are pleased with them , allah will not be pleased with the people who are al-fasiqun .
nay ! we shall record what he says , and we shall add and add to his punishment .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
and amuse themselves with vain argumentation .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
but if they desist , then surely allah is forgiving , merciful .
god knows the disloyalty of the eyes and what the hearts conceal .
who amasses wealth and counts it ,
this qur'an is not such as could have been invented by other than allah . it confirms what was before it , and a detailed exposition of the book in which there is no doubt , from the lord of the worlds .
and that which you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , does not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakah , seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who will be given a manifold increase .
they will say : nay ! you yourselves were not believers .
when the oceans are gushed forth ,
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
indeed , he is the one who does not want to do any of you to do so . but what is the matter with such things as to do what they have been given ? those who have abandoned them will be rewarded by their evil deeds , and they will receive a reward from their lord .
noble scribes
many societies have passed away before you . travel in the land and see what was the end of those who rejected truth .
and it will be said to them : where are thosethat you used to worship
and we gave him the good news of isaac , a prophet , one of the righteous .
so allah rewarded them for what they said with gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever ; that is the recompense of the good-doers .
and of the cattle there are some for burden and some for meat ; eat of what allah has provided you and do not follow in satan ’ s footsteps ; he is indeed your manifest enemy .
and that certainly our armies will be victorious .
your lord knows best who strays from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
a brief enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment .
o you who have believed , indeed , the cattle and the flesh of grazing livestock are for youthe tongue of allah . in that case , other than that of which people have been differing , so be wary of allah , so that you may be felicitous .
it is due to the poor refugees who have been driven out from their homes and their possessions , seeking the favor of god and his approval . they are the loyal .
but if they turn away , say : 'allah is sufficient for me . there is no god but he . in him i have put my trust . he is the lord of the mighty throne '
were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you in this world and the hereafter , a grievous punishment would have afflicted you for what you ventured into .
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
and blessed is he to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , and with him is the knowledge of the hour , and to him you shall be returned .
or to a needy person in misery ;
so there was a pair of two importance . the two groups said : ' i am seen at a sign . i see the signs of the suppliant which is right . the people look at the two point of the people . the people told them , i see you in different portions .
and believe in that which i have sent down confirming that which is with you , and be not the first to disbelieve therein , and do not exchange my revelations for a small price ; and fear me alone .
nay , man will be evidence against himself ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
“ and if you turn your back , i do not ask any fee from you ; my reward is only upon allah , and i am commanded to be of those who submit . ”
do they not see that we drive the water to the barren land and bring forth therefrom crops from which their cattle and themselves eat ? will they not see ?
how many a town defied the command of its lord and his messengers , so we called it to a severe account and punished it with a dire punishment .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
they ask you about the mountains . tell them , my lord will grind them to powder
to your lord on that day shall be the driving .
suchjesus the son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
why do you not fight for the cause of god or save the helpless men and women who cry out to the weak , saying , “ our lord , we delivered us from this town , and bring a guardian from us ? ”
and in thamud , when they were told , ‘ enjoy for a while . ’
and by the dawn when it breathes
that is the bounty from allah , and sufficient is allah as knower .
that is because allah merges the night into the day , and he merges the day into the night ; and because allah is hearing , seeing .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
he gives ear to a mere statement and a light . but if he were out of his heart , you would be able to receive the sun or the moon . if you heard them , be not able to do so . but if he should be among them , then do not be able to do this .
o you who believe ! be conscious of your own selves . some of you are straightforward . there is a mention of the truth , in which one of you is true , so do not dispute with one another . do you look forward to any other claim in the case of your lord ? god will surely be watchful .
and when he had furnished them with their supplies , he said : bring unto me a brother of yours from your father . see ye not that i give full measure and that i am the best of hosts ?
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
the verses of the book . a word is revealed to them . the words of god is true . the decree of god is true . they say : god alone has the knowledge of the unseen , and the most great .
by no means ! by the moon ,
we have created maidens perfectly
and the people of the scripturediffered not to themselves but only one religion ; so the religion became one of them , and if the word of your lord had not been concluded , the matter would have been decided between them ; in this there is a disagreement .
in their hearts was the example of abraham . in this there is a lesson for him who wishes to be godwary , and he who turns away from the path of god , will have the power to do so . he who does good will be the real .
they said : o shu'aib ! does your prayer command you that we should leave off what our fathers worshipped , or that we should not do with our wealth what we please ? indeed , you are the forbearing , the discerning .
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
and ease my task for me ;
because he thinks himself self-sufficient :
they will live amid the scorching ,
eat and pasture your cattle : verily therein are signs for men of sagacity .
the revelation of the book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
then which of thy lord 's bounties disputest thou ?
there surely is an oath for thinking man .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
indeed the worst of beasts in allah ’ s sight are the deaf and dumb who do not exercise their reason .
had they believed and been righteous , the reward from god would have been better , if they only knew .
call to the path of your lord with wisdom and fair exhortation , and dispute with them in the best manner . your lord knows best who has strayed from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
he created the heavens and the earth with consummate wisdom . he is exalted above all that they associate with him .
and who is a greater wrong-doer than he who is reminded of the signs of his lord , but he made it a perfect voice , and he made a proclamation to him ? and if thou callest them to the guidance , then they will not have faith .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , behold , they groan .
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine . i never decide an affair until you are present with me . ”
o ye wives of the prophet ! whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness , the punishment for her will be doubled , and that is easy for allah .
and had he not been of those who exalt allah ,
on the day when the skies are convulsed ,
so be patient , then , with the messenger of the messengers , and do not be with the ones who have been given knowledge . the truth is only with the words of wisdom .
o prophet , the prophet has made the lawful to you , so that you may recite the word in the course of god . a word is revealed to you . it is the tribe of mary , who made the people of this book , and the woman 's daughter to whom god has caused a grave word . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
our lord ! let not our hearts deviate after thou hast guided us , and bestow on us mercy from thine presence . lo ! thou , only thou , art the bestower .
they are the ones who give the lie to the true ones who have broken their duty to the path of god , as their means of duty to them , so they will not have any share of it . god will cause them to suffer a painful torment .
thou plungest night into day , and thou plungest day into night , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless , and thou bringest forth the living from the lifeless ; and thou providest for whomsoever thou wilt without reckoning .
, o jesus , son of mary , remember me , my son , when i am a messenger of the faithful , when i am a the messenger of the faithful , when i have spoken to them by the means of the faithful , when i have been in the matter of the people of the bookand the injeel , when the torah and the gospel are recorded at the end of the law . this is the right course .
on that day , friends will be enemies of one another , except for the righteous .
and when what they called upon , then we have opened the gates of the qur'an , and then we opened it for the sake of a matter that they had been told , and when they were in the city , they begin to despair .
the parable of the two parties is that you had entered it , if their children had come to them . but if the children of lot had come to them , they will also have the right direction of the law of mary . if what you say is true , the law of mary will also be a great share of what they can .
and whomsoever allah guideth , none can lead astray . is not allah mighty , and lord of retribution ?
will they not then contemplate on the koran ? or are there locks upon their hearts ?
its spathes are like the heads of satans
say : behold what is in the heavens and the earth ! and signs and warnings avail not folk who will not believe .
those are the ones whom god has blessed , the messengers of adam , and the prophets , from among the prophets , and those who , of abraham , and those who have lost them . they will fall in prostration .
it is he who has created for youhearing , sight , and hearts . little thanks you give .
that they may eat of the fruit thereof , and their hands did not make it . will they not then be grateful ?
o you who believe ! fulfill your commitments . the animals of grazing livestock are permitted for you , except that which is recited to you , while you are in pilgrim sanctity . god decrees whatever he wills .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
o you who believe ! be conscious of god , so that you may speak to him , or your father , and your forefathers . if a group is better than god 's , they do not have any knowledge of this , but if you do not give the witnesses , then know that god is aware of the things you do .
the king said , “ i sawseven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones , and seven green spikes , and seven others dry . o courtiers , give me my vision , if you can interpret visions . ”
and we defer it only to a term determined .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
but he did not brave the ascent .
we have revealed to you the book with the truth , so worship god , devoting your religion to him .
as for him who gives and is righteous .
indeed you come to men with desire instead of women ! rather , you are a transgressing people .
they had sought to do him harm , but we frustrated them .
we will brand him on the muzzle .
nor are darkness and light .
he said , “ you are granted your request , o moses .
of him seeksevery creature in the heavens and on earth : every day insplendour doth he !
so he threw it down , and lo ! it was a rapidly moving snake .
enter thou my garden !
and they say , “ when will this promise come , if you are truthful ? ”
indeed , the messengers before you had denied , but they came to them on account of their faith . so they will be given guidance until they have no faith in it . and we will certainly tell them of the book of clear evidence .
and preferred the life of this world ,
and a tree that grows on mount sinai which produces oil and a condiment for those who eat .
and the two seas are not equal , neither is the grain of a hot water , and the other salt and bitter , and they will be made to look upon it . and you will receive the like of it , as it is the command of allah that you may be grateful .
so allah saved them from the evil of that day , and has procured them radiancy and gladness ,
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
you are not a warden over them ,
this is the fire which you used to deny .
believers , have fear of god and believe in his messenger . he will give you a double share of his mercy and will give you a light by which you will walk . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
god is the only lord as the lord of the universe , the living , the everlasting . whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to him , and he is the master of the heavens and the earth . he is the master of the heavens and the earth . what is the matter with him that he has no knowledge of the universe ?
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
and those who guard their private parts
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he said , “ shall i trust you with him , except as i trusted you with his brother before ? therefore allah is the best protector , and he is the most merciful of the merciful . ”
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it . he was unfair and ignorant .
and to everyone we have appointed heirs of what parents and relatives leave behind . and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give their share . allah is witness to all things .
or , when it beholds the punishment , it would say , “ if only i could be sent back , so that i may be among the doers of good . ”
as if they were closely guarded pearls .
unquestionably , it is they who are the corrupters , but they are not aware .
indeed you come to men with desire instead of women ! rather , you are a transgressing people .
and raised couches .
and when the good befalleth them , then is it to be judged , and they said : our father ! we have been preaching unto them , so that the affair is of no profit to us . it is the right course . it is a command .
and with them will be virgins of refraining looks and of equal age .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
and all things we have recorded in a book .
those who love that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
we gave them our signs , but they turned away from them .
allah enlargeth the provision for whom he will , and straiteneth . and they rejoice in the life of the world , whereas the life of the world is but aenjoyment ,
verily they were wont not to look for a reckoning .
and youwill be in three kinds .
we have sent to you a messenger , a witness over you , as we sent a messenger to pharaoh .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
that allah may forgive you your shortcomings , whether earlier or later , and may complete his favor upon you and guide you to a straight path
do you feel secure that he will not cause a slope of the land to engulf you , or send a sand-storm upon you ? then you will find no protector for you .
there is no doubt that i call you to the retribution , and there is no duty to you in this world , nor is it to be a thing to return to god ; and those who are wicked shall be the inhabitants of the fire , and they will be the inhabitants of the fire .
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
or do they benefit or harm you ?
when they reach it , their ears and their eyes and their skins testify against them as to what they did .
and the duty of his people is just a perfect command ; and only the extent of its deeds is only for his own good , and the only decision is for his own good ; “ our lord , do not let us be a prey to the right way ; and our lord , do not have mercy upon us , except as you have been doing ; and do not be among the skeptics . ”
so you and your deities
the children of israel ' i am a messenger of the children of israel to bring you a clear message from your lord . the truth is that i will bring you the judgement from your lord . this is the law of god . the truth is that you will receive the judgment of god .
only those who believe in allah and the last day , who establish their prayers and pay the obligatory charity , and fear none except allah – it may be that they will be among the guided .
and abraham left this legacy to his sons , and to jacob , and said , “ o my sons , god has chosen this religion for you ; so do not die except as the muslims . ”
so when he came to the people , a single people exposed , so that they could see what they had said . what is the matter with them ? they said , ‘ what is the matter with us ? ’ ‘ ‘ ‘ what ! ’ ‘ ‘ what is the open reality ? ’ ’ ’
and what will make you comprehend what the night of destiny is ?
as for those who do not believe in the hereafter , we have made their deeds fair-seeming to them , so they wander blindly .
o you who believe ! fulfill your commitments . the animals of grazing livestock are permitted for you , except that which is recited to you , while you are in pilgrim sanctity . god decrees whatever he wills .
the gates of heaven will not be opened for those who deny our revelations and are arrogant toward the doors of heaven , nor will they enter paradise until a camel passes through the eye of a needle . thus do we recompense the criminals .
anddavid and solomon , when they gave judgement concerning the tillage when the sheep of some people strayed into it by night ; and we were witness to their judgement .
each man will have enough cares that day .
but when they see it nigh , the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry , and it will be said : this is that which ye used to call for .
let not those who disbelieve think that the respite we give them is good for them . we give them respite so that they may increase their sins , and there is a humiliating punishment for them .
o people of the book ! why do you argue about abraham , when the torah and the gospel were not revealed till after him ? have you then no sense ?
the promise of allah . allah does not break his promise , but most people do not know .
he will send you abundant rain from the sky ,
so remind , . you are only a reminder .
whoever comeswith a good deed will have better than it , and they will be secure from terror on the day .
the people of lut rejectedwarning .
and moses felt afraid within himself .
on that day , none will punish as he punishes .
so today none of you can benefit or harm one another . and we shall say to the wrongdoers , “ taste the punishment of the fire which you used to deny ! ”
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
until , when he reachedbetween two mountains , he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word .
taste thou ! thou art indeed mighty , honoured !
surely i will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides ; then i will surely crucify you all .
it is he who sends down to his servant clear signs , that he may bring you forth from darkness into light ; and indeed allah is most kind and merciful to you .
and to adtheir brother hud . he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
my lord ! grant me wisdom , and join me with the righteous ,
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
i have put my trust in god , my lord and your lord . there is no living creature which he does not hold by its forelock . my lord is on the straight path .
o you who have faith ! do not take your women for guardians , instead of allah , and do not seek to make a clear trace of them , except in order to be clear to them , but do not be an open word for them , except for what they have done . and ever is allah , of what they do not ,
they had sought to do him harm , but we frustrated them .
you were longing for death , before you met it . now you have seen it with your own eyes .
and eat of the lawful and good things with which allah has provided you . and fear allah , in whom you believe .
and we have built above you seven strong ones ,
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
by the star when it goes down , -
who will cause me to die and then bring me to life ;
has the story of moses reached you ?
and those who are faithful to their trusts and their covenant
and be patient ; indeed allah does not waste the reward of the virtuous .
i am a trustworthy messenger to you .
and he who believed said : o my people ! follow me , i will guide you to the right path .
as for those who were guided , he increases their guidance and gives them their protection .
freeing a neck
and he found thee wandering , so he guided thee ,
marked by your lord for the transgressors .
but it is nothing but a reminder to all the worlds .
then he turned to the heaven when it was smoke , and said to it and to the earth , come willingly or unwillingly . they both said , we come willingly .
have they not journeyed through the land and seen what was the end of those before them ? allah destroyed them completely and a similarthe disbelievers .
and a cup overflowing .
the well-to-do and the rich among you should not stop the relatives or the destitute and the destitute . let not the property of allah be going to forgive you . allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
we send not down the angels , save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
and to everyone we have appointed heirs of what parents and relatives leave behind . and to those with whom you have made a covenant , give their share . allah is witness to all things .
for those who have been given knowledge of this book , know that this quran is a revelation from the lord of the universe , and that it is the truth from the lord of the universe . god is a guide to the believers .
our lord ! and make them enter the gardens of eden which thou hast promised to them , and those who are righteous among their fathers , their wives and their offspring . lo ! thou , only thou , art the mighty , the wise .
say : ' i am only the speech of you , but it is to be revealed to me . god is the one god ; so as for him who will be guided '
allah was pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance to you under the tree , and he knew what was in their hearts , and he sent downtranquility upon them and rewarded them with a victory near at hand
they will have sheets of fire above them and sheets of fire . this is how god frightens his servants . my servants have fear of me .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after receiving the ancient divine testaments .
or do they envy people for what god has given them of his bounty ? but we had already given the family of abraham the book and wisdom , and a great kingdom .
bring them back to me ; and he began caressing their shins and necks .
see you not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
they said , 'thou knowest we have no right to thy daughters , and thou knowest what we want . '
the day when they will come out of their graves in haste , as if racing towards a target ,
is this a better reception , or the zaqqum tree ?
and whoever comes after allah , then indeed , those who disbelieve after it shall be made to pass away , but those who disbelieve will be in the state of their disbelief- and he who is oblivious of the truth .
he said , “ did i not tell you that you will not be able to patiently stay with me ? ”
without adding .
so turn away from them . on the day when the caller calls to a terrible thing ,
then , o dear prophet , after this , the day of judgment will be made public , and the matter is in truth . they have said , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ are we to be given a clear authority to you ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a thing which is indeed allah ’ s precedent , and say , ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ say , ‘ ‘ indeed , it is a certain thing . ’
he will have no strength or helper .
who do not call upon another god with god , nor kill the soul which god has forbidden except by right , and commit illegal sexual intercourse . whoever does this will receive punishment .
he said : take hold of it , and fear not ; we will restore it to its former state .
then we pardoned you after that so that you might give thanks .
indeed , you are in differing speech .
and we have created for them the like of it in which they board .
say thou : he it is who hath spread you over the earth , and unto him ye shall be gathered .
who believe in the unseen , and perform the prayer , and spend out of what we have provided for them ;
and fight them until there is no more tumult or oppression , and obedience is wholly for allah . so if they desist , allah sees the things they do .
and remember we saved you from pharaoh 's people , who afflicted you with the worst of sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women . in that was a great trial from your lord .
on that day you will be exposed , and no secret of yours will remain hidden .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on the earth glorifies allah , the sovereign , the holy , the all-mighty , the all-wise .
some arabsregard what they spend as afine and wait for some misfortune to befall you . theirs shall be the evil turn ! allah is all-hearing , all-knowing .
he said : my lord knows what is said in the heavens and the earth , and he is the hearing , the knowing .
the righteously striving believers are the best of all creatures .
no , him you will call , and he will remove that for which you supplicated him , if he will , and you will forget what you ascribeaspartners . ’
and of his signs is that the heaven and earth stand firm by his command ; then when he calls you with acall from the earth , lo ! you come forth .
when you come to the hypocrites , they ask you for forgiveness . say , ‘ ask forgiveness of allah , and do not seek forgiveness from him . allah has the knowledge of all that you do .
in fact man wishes to do wrongin the time in front of him .
woe to you !
among thornless lote-trees
do they feel secure that there shall come upon them no enveloping of the chastisement of allah , or that the hour will not come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
can not seduce away from him .
he said , “ do you indeed believe in me before i have given you permission ? indeed , this was the case of moosa , and i swear by the hand of it , so that you shall know the very end !
it is not for any believer , man or woman , when allah and his messenger have decreed a matter that they should have any option in their decision . whoever disobeys allah and his messenger has certainly strayed into manifest error .
there is no difference between you and them : if you are shown the matter , then do not be in the least . but if you are righteous—he is forgiving and merciful .
see they not how allah originates creation , then repeats it . verily , that is easy for allah .
then whatcauses youto deny the recompense ?
they will eat from it , and fill their bellies with it .
relaxing therein , and calling for abundant fruit and beverage .
until the day of the time appointed . ”
children of adam , did i not command you not to worship satan . he is your sworn enemy .
he has no authority over those who believe and put their trust in their lord .
and those who hold fast by the book and establish prayer -- verily we shall not waste the hire of the rectifiers .
they are but names , named by you and your fathers . god has sent down no authority for them . they follow only conjecture and wish-fulfilment , even though guidance has come to them from their lord .
and there were in the city nine persons who made mischief in the land and did not act aright .
they are always harassing us .
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
that which they are engaged upon shall be shattered and all their works are vain .
the foolish among the people will say , what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? say : to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path .
and then , to say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the heavens and the earth ” ; so let the people of israel say , “ we have been sent by the lord of all the worlds , so send us down from the guidance of your lord . ”
proclaim , “ i do not ask any fee from you for this , except that whoever wills may take the way to his lord . ”
and those who , when they are oppressed vindicate themselves .
he said : my lord ! respite me till the day whereon they are raised up .
they said , as they turned towards them , “ what are you missing ? ”
so proclaim openly what you are commanded , and avoid the polytheists .
again , no indeed ; you shall soon know .
then roused them to ascertain which of the two groups could best calculate the length of their stay .
and if you call them to guidance they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
he will sip it , but will not be able to gulp it down , and death will come to him from every side , but he will not die , and before him is a harsh punishment .
your lord is the one who does not worship except one , and you have passed it on , and when a party of them is mentioned , it is the same for them , and do not speak with them , for they are telling the truth .
and remembers the name of his lord , so he prays .
was he not a drop of sperm emitted ?
and allah it is who sendeth down the likeness of the workers of mankind ; he will cause it to be scattered , and he will make it traverse the heaven ; and when he will make the earth pass away , and behold , he will be in the midst of his servants , when he will be of the thrivers .
he said , “ you know well that none sent these down except the lord of the heavens and the earth , as eye-openers ; and i think that you , o pharaoh , are doomed . ”
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates a lie against allah and denies the truth when it has come to him ? is there not in hell room for the disbelievers ?
so we answered him , and removed the affliction that was upon him , and we restored his family to him , and the like thereof along with them , as a mercy from us and a reminder for the worshippers .
god has promised you , the promise of god is true . his words is too trying to reach your hearts until the time of judgment came to him . the matter is a result of their hearts . god has forgiven you , for god is munificent and bounty .
o prophet ! why bannest thou that which allah hath made lawful unto thee , seeking the good-will of thy wives ? and allah is forgiving , merciful .
we sent down water from the sky in due measure , and lodged it in the earth , and we are able to take it away .
proclaim , “ call upon those whom you assume besides allah – so they do not have any power to relieve the misfortune from you nor to avert it . ”
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
when they are called to god and his messenger so that the messenger may judge between them , a party of them turns away .
and the sea set aflame .
and whoever does allah , then guide his guidance , and whoever follows the right way – so you will not find any one except him ; and the fire is their destination . and the fire is their destination .
if two men among you commit it , punish them both . if they repent and reform , leave them alone . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least , and for them is a painful punishment .
and other kindsresembling it . ’
thinking his riches have made him immortal !
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , it is they who are the liars .
whatever misfortune befalls you is a consequence of your own deeds . he pardons much .
until , when he reached the rising of the sun , he found it rising upon a people for whom we had provided no shelter from it .
that is their goal of knowledge . surely your lord knows best him who goes astray from his path , and he knows best those who are guided .
those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance we have revealed , after we have made it clear to the people of the book , will be condemned by god and the cursers .
a word is revealed to the one , saying , “ listen to one another . say , “ listen to the one who ” ; and say , “ listen to what you say ; and the reward of god is a painful punishment . ”
save those who repent before ye overpower them . for know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
do not eat of that over which god 's name has not been mentioned , and that is sinful . the satans inspire their friends to dispute with you . if you obey them , you will be polytheists .
to you your religion , and to me my religion .
and your lord knows what their breasts conceal and what they declare .
therein they shall have whatever they desire—and we have even more .
and when he reached his maturity , and became firm , we gave him wisdom and knowledge . thus do we reward those who do good .
they will say : nay ! you yourselves were not believers .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like yourselves . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you speak truly .
nay , everyone of them desires that he should be given pages spread out .
and thus we have sent it down as a judgment in arabic ; and if you follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge , you will not have against allah any guardian or a protector .
and roasting at hell-fire .
your lord is the all-sufficient dispenser of mercy . if he will , he can take you away , and make whomever he wishes succeed you , just as he produced you from the seed of another people .
a fitting recompense .
believers , if you obey the unbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
and when the word was set open for you , he said , “ do you care to kill me at all ? ” so he said , “ do you care to kill me in the least , and do not grieve for your deeds , o moses , so that you may be regretful to it ? ”
if you are afflicted by the evil , or in a balance , they will be grieved by it , and if the matter is to be fulfilled , they will be grieved by it . and if you are patient , it will be their due .
and the morning as it lights up .
they said , “ jumbles of dreams , and we do not know the interpretation of dreams . ”
and that those who do not believe in the life to come -- we have prepared for them a painful chastisement .
satisfied with their endeavor .
but satan whispered evil to him , saying , adam , shall i direct you to the tree of eternity and to a kingdom that never declines ?
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
then as for him who is inordinate ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and bow down with those who bow down .
is it not clear to those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants that if we willed , we could smite them for their sins and set a seal upon their hearts so they would not hear ?
'adbelied the messengers .
and follow the truth for the cause of god , and do not associate others with god in his divinity ; and he who ascribes partners to god is in a blaze .
and to make a light to you through the tongue of islamic monotheism and hearts , and give up to you a place of safety . then , it is open to you , so that you will be able to see them .
he said : o adam ! tell them their names . when adam said to the names of abraham : did i not tell you that i know the secrets of the heavens and the earth and what you reveal ?
and if thou ask them who created them , they will surely say : allah . how then are they turned away ?
and when the good news of your daughter came , he was brought down to it , so that it may be a source of strength from the sky , so that it may be , with the commands of allah , and it may be that he is .
do they wishto hurry on our punishment ?
say : who is it that delivereth you from the darknesses of the land and the sea , when ye cry unto him in humility and in secrecy : if he delivered us from this , we shall surely be of the thankful ?
he said : and who despairs of the mercy of his lord except those who are astray ?
and for their taking usury , which were prohibited to them , and their consuming people 's wealth wrongfully ; and we have prepared for the disbelievers among them a painful chastisement .
enveloping the people. ‘ this is a painful punishment .
so they departed , talking in low voices :
on the day when every soul finds its good guidance , it will see its good and good deeds . the guilty will wish that it had been a great veil among them . god warns you about himself . god is kind towards the servants .
and neverpray for one of them who dies , nor stand by his grave . for they disbelieved in allah and his messenger and died while they were fasiqun .
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
he created man from a sperm-drop ; and behold , he is an open contender !
these will be given their reward twice over because they are steadfast , and repel evil with good , and spendout of what we have given them .
it is not in accordance with your desires , nor the wishes of the people of the book : whoever works evil , will be requited for it , and he will not find for himself , besides allah , any protector or helper .
but only as an admonition unto him who feareth ,
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it still . then we made the sun its pilot ;
peace be to the messengers !
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
how many generations have we destroyed since noah ! your lord is sufficient as knower and beholder of the sins of his servants .
he set outon an expedition ,
then he turned his back to his people , and said : o my people ! allah has promised to you what is promised me , or is it that the promise of your lord should be fulfilled ?
o ye who believe ! remember allah with much remembrance .
andthose who disbelieve and reject our communications , these are the companions of the name .
we shall save your body this day so that you may be a sign for those after you . many people are heedless of our signs .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power over the grace of allah , and that the bounty is in allah 's hand ; he bestows it on whomsoever he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
and the sun runs on to a term appointed for it ; that is the ordaining of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
and among every nation is a guidance from their own messengers ; then , we will say to the people , bring your proof , then bring an ember , and say , bring your proof , and the truth is to god . what is the matter with them , that they will be called to account .
a grouphe guided , and a part justly disposed in error ; indeed they took the devils for guardians instead of allah , and supposed they are guided .
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and they say : when we are lost in the earth , shall we indeed be recreated anew ? nay , but they deny the meeting with their lord .
o you who have faith ! do not be surprised at what they attribute to you . a true word is like the case of your people . so it is like a confirmation of what you have done . the words of the people of understanding will be given to light . allah is the almighty , the most merciful .
what ! when we are dead and have become dust and bones , shall we then indeed be raised up ?
and our command is but a single , like the twinkling of an eye .
or have they the depositoriesof your lord ? or are they the controllers ?
so ask them whether your lord has daughters and they have sons .
he is god , the creator , the maker , the fashioner . his are the names most beautiful . whatever is in the heavens and the earth sings his praises . he is the majestic and all-wise .
he said , 'god will bring you it , if he will , and you will not be able to frustrate him .
the decree of god is revealed to you from what has been revealed to you . follow what is revealed to you of your lord . they are the ones who have been given mercy to you . god wants to relieve them of the things they are unjust .
have you not seen that allah will make you enter the sky , so that you may recite it in the midst of the sky , and you will see the like of it , and you will see the like of it in the sea , and he will inform you of what he pleases , and he will inform you of what you have done ?
do not move your tongue with it to hasten it .
or its water may sink into the earth , so that you will never be able to find it again .
say , lord , i seek your protection against the strong temptations of the devils .
god will not forgive those who deny the truth and act wrongfully , nor will he guide them to any way .
o people of the book ! why do you disbelieve in the verses of allah while you witness ?
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
he will say : how long tarried ye in the earth , counting by years ?
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
nor shade and heat
i will certainly punish him severely or slaughter him unless he brings me a clear reason .
o you who believe ! be watchful of your religion , and then deny the truth . soon god will bring to those a people worthy of all virtue . the people of understanding will also be devoted to god in his divinity . god is munificent and omniscient .
and remember our servant job , when he called out to his lord : satan has afflicted me with hardship and torment .
and they said , “ are we to follow a man from among us ? we would surely be in error and insane . ”
then , after them , we sent moses and aaron to pharaoh and his chiefs with our signs , but they behaved arrogantly and were a sinful people .
and it is he who made the night a covering for you , and the sleep as a rest , and he made the day a revival .
so what is the matter with us that if we were to turn away , then indeed , he is the one who has come to you with a straight path , so that we might be responsible for what they have been seeking , and be patient .
say : if youlove allah then follow me , allah will love you and forgive you your sins . and allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
say : whatever reward i might have asked of you is yours . my reward is due from none but allah . he is witness over all things .
your lord said to the angels , “ i am creating a human being from clay , from molded mud . ”
then it will be said to them : where are theto which you used to associate
he created the heavens and the earth with truth , and he shaped you and gave you good shapes . to him is the arrival .
and we gave him isaac and jacob and gave the prophethood and the book to his descendants . we gave him his reward in this world , and in the hereafter he will be among the upright .
those who fear their lord in the unseen , tremble because of the hour .
and that certainly our armies will be victorious .
and these towns—we destroyed them when they did wrong , and we appointed a time for their destruction .
who , when they measurefrom the people , take the full measure ,
surely god holds the heavens and the earth , lest they should be displaced , and if they were to deviate , no one could hold them after him ; surely he is all-forgiving , all-forgiving .
he is all-hearing , all-knowing .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
the words of god and his messenger is for the people of the day . god and his messenger are free from all the same . if you are bent on denying the truth , the day of judgment will certainly be better for you . but if you should turn away , then know that you will not be able to escape from god .
surely the chastisement of their lord is a thing none can feel secure from ;
and say : my lord ! cause me to enter a rightful entrance and cause me to go forth with a rightful outgoing , and grant me from yourself an authority helpful .
that thou followedst me not ? hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
everyone on earth is destined to die .
and of his signs is that thou seest the earth lowly ; but when we send down water upon it , it quivers , and swells . verily he who quickeneth is the quickener of the dead . verily he is over everything potent .
those to whom we gave the book know himas they know their own sons . but there is a party of them conceal the truth while they know .
he gives wisdom to whomever he wills . whoever is given wisdom has been given much good . yet none remembers this except men of wisdom .
on the day when allah will raise them all together , they will swear to him as they swear to you , thinking that they are on something . unquestionably , it is they who are the liars .
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
do they associate with him those who create nothing and are themselves created ?
thus do we expound the signs that the way of the unrighteous may be manifest .
or do you have a clear authority ?
eyes be lowered in submission .
each soul will come with a driver and a witness .
for a known extent .
it is he who accepts the repentance of his worshipers , and remits the sins , and knows what you do .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are just myths of the ancients . ’
enter among my servants
he who created all the pairs , and appointed for you ships and cattle on which you ride ,
had there been a guidance for the people before you had come to them , they just had the same chance for them to be true . they have the right to do so . they have the right to do so . god is fully aware of what they do .
and it was revealed unto nuh : verily none of thy people will believe save those who have believed already . so be not distressed because of what they used to do .
in the scriptures of the ancients .
allah has given to the people a book from the people of the sacred mosque . allah has decreed a matter that is a matter for the prophet . so be wary of allah , that which is a matter of the prophet , so that you may be punished .
and we are not going to be punished .
and his wife , the portress of fire wood ,
and on them , and on the ships , you are transported .
‘ ad , hud , ’ s brother , hud . he said , ‘ o my people ! you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . ‘ ‘ you have no god other than he . indeed , my lord is the most acceptor of repentance . ’
say , have you considered about the things they call upon besides god ? have you seen what you have worshipped other than god ? have you received the tradition of god , or are the people given to you ? no , the unjust will not have any happiness .
say , “ my prayer and my worship , and my life and my death , are all for allah , the lord of the creation . ”
those who do not believe in the hereafter will say to those who do not believe in the hereafter : when will the ones who believe in the hereafter will come to know ? in fact , they are in grave doubt concerning it .
and assuredly allah had succoured you at badr while ye were humble . so fear allah , that ye may give thanks .
nay ! verily , the recordof al-abrar , isin 'illiyyun .
the messenger and the believers are only as a test from their lord , and the messengers of the book and the messengers are not revealed except in the case of god . they said , “ put your duty to me , and you will be returned to me . ”
o people , the messenger has come to you with the truth from your lord , so believe you . it is best for you to believe . but god is all-knowing and all-wise .
and the reward of the hereafter is better for those who believe and are mindful of allah .
he said : fear not , surely i am with you both : i hear and see .
have they not seen how many generations we destroyed before them , which will not return to them ?
and your lord comes with the angels , rank upon rank ,
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
then , as for those who migrate in the way of allah , is to adhere to him . he will show you the truth , and he will provide for you a matter . and he is ever forgiving , most merciful .
'such , says your lord ' they replied : 'he is the wise , the knower '
men , o people , have fear of the truth which you have created from one another . have fear of god , both men and women . have fear of god . have fear of god .
moses said , o my people , if you have believed in allah , then put your trust in him if you are muslims .
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
and iwill make a scheme .
allah is all-attentive to his servants . he provides for whomever he wishes , and he is the all-strong , the all-mighty .
whoever brings a good deed shall have better than it ; and whoever brings evil , those who do evil shall not be rewardedaught except what they used to do .
they said : we have been persecuted before you came to us and after you have come to us . he said : it may be that your lord will destroy your enemy and make you inheritors in the land . then he will see how you act .
, o jesus , son of mary , remember me , my son , when i am a messenger of the faithful , when i am a the messenger of the faithful , when i have spoken to them by the means of the faithful , when i have been in the matter of the people of the bookand the injeel , when the torah and the gospel are recorded at the end of the law . this is the right course .
and we gave them of our mercy , and we made for them a renown lofty .
and treasures and a station noble .
zachariah prayed , lord , do not leave me alone without offspring , although you are the best heir .
and when abraham and ishmael were raising the foundations of the house , , our lord , accept this from us , you are the hearer , the knower .
they are the ones who have lost their souls , and what they forged has forsaken them .
verily allah knoweth the unseen of the heavens and the earth ; and allah sees well all that ye do .
whether you disclose a goodor hide it , or pardon an evil , allah is indeed all-excusing , all-powerful .
they fear their lord above them , and do what they are commanded .
and to you is the true word ; and if you be shown the truth , it is only for you to have a right path ; so when the promise of the promise is to come , it is only to you that the believers are at the like of the first time ; then , let the believers deny it .
and of his signs is that he created you from dust , then , behold , you became humans scattering !
they ask you , when will the hour of doom come ? tell them : the knowledge of the hour is only with my lord , and when the hour has come , it is only to my lord that the hour is coming . but most of them will not be able to say .
we know indeed that what they say grieves you . indeed , they do not call you a liar , but it is allah ’ s signs that the wrongdoers deny .
and the mountains stakes ?
he punishes whom he will and shows mercy to whom he pleases , and to him you will be returned .
when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the most gracious , his face darkens , and he suppresses grief .
say : o unbelievers !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
our word has already gone out to our servant messengers .
who brings forth the pastures ,
shall i tell you on whom the satans descend ?
and women who do not fear the polytheists until they believe in the world , and the believing women ; so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the polytheists – so they are free from the same ; and allah will inform the people of the same time , although they do not accept advice .
and if allah were to enlarge the provision for his slaves , they would surely rebel in the earth , but he sends down in due measure whatever he wills . indeed , he is all-aware , all-seeing about his servants .
in a clear arabic language .
so set your face to the religion , inclining to truth.the fitrah of allah upon which he has created man . there is no changing of the creation of allah . that is the straight religion , but most people do not know .
were there for us a return , we would be of the believers .
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
o people who have faith ! if you heard the one one of another , a term has made it known to you , the words of allah is true . so let there be no word to be a matter with you , except that it may be a word of truth for you , or that it may be a matter in the case of allah , and that it may be a matter with the commands of allah , and he will not be among the skeptics .
say : verily , my lord is the all knowing of what is said and what is manifest to him . so what is the matter with the words of allah , which has been revealed to him ? for he has made of you a book of pure things .
by the witness and the witnessed ,
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
it left nothing that it came upon without reducing it to rubble .
and his kinsfolk who had stood by him ,
what is the matter with you ? how do you judge ?
and whenever a surah is revealed , they look at one another : 'does anyone see you ? ' then they turn away . allah has turned away their hearts , for they are a people who do not understand .
and do not marry women whom your fathers married , except what has already passed . indeed , it was an immorality and an evil way .
the example of this book is true ; word is true ; word is true ; this is the decree , the decree of your lord , true . what is the matter with your own words , both of them , to whom you have singled out a sound . god is most forgiving and ever merciful .
for the sake of allah , to show you the forgiveness , the means of the heavens and the earth . the example of the heavens and the earth , is the case of those who believe in allah and his messengers . and allah is owner of great bounty .
and how will they say , abraham , and ishmael , and jacob , and the messiah , and the christians , or the christians , and the christians ? say : is it better than god , that god is a greater doer of what you do ?
and they worship besides allah that which does not possess for themprovision from the heavens and the earth , nor have they any power .
say : 'everyone is waiting ; so wait . you shall know who are the companions of the even path , and who is guided '
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
so . and we knew all about him .
wavering between , neither to these nor to those ; and whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
again , what will explain to thee what the day of judgment is ?
no ! their own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts .
his command , when he wills a thing , is to say to it 'be , ' and it is .
when their brother hud said unto them : fear ye not ?
perish man ! how ungrateful he is !
then we raised the children of israel through the sea , and they came to a people who were devoted to their gods . they said : o moses , make us a pattern , like those of the idol-worshippers . you are ignorant , he replied .
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
and to say the word of allah , indeed , fear allah , and do not keep your duty to him ; it is in truth , so that you may be guided .
and allah expoundeth unto you the revelations and allah is knowing , wise .
repulsed , for they are under a perpetual penalty ,
moses said , ‘ i seek the protection of my lord and your lord from every arrogant who does not believe in the day of reckoning . ’
and keep away from ar-rujz !
and some of them will confront the others ,
no—when the earth is leveled , pounded , and crushed .
call on your lord humbly and secretly . he does not love the transgressors .
and he it is who hath made you successors on the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth in the earth , those who disbelieve will be on the infidelity other than allah , and they will not be able to receive aught but the wrath of their lord .
who corrupt the land and do not reform it .
it is god who makes the way for you to recite the point . this is the law of god . he who does the right judgement will receive his judgement . he who has received the judgement of god will have a genuine dwelling .
he said , “ i will not bring you any expert , until you solemnly promise him to return to me , except for the promise of him ; and when they swore to me , he said , “ god is the witness of what we have said . ”
the day that you will see it , every suckling female will forget her suckling , and every pregnant female will discharge her burden , and you will see men drunk , yet they will not be drunken , but god 's chastisement is terrible .
and you are a lodger in this country .
to bring each knowing wizard unto thee .
and do not be saddened by your lord that most of you have been sent down by your lord . but most of them will not be troubled by your lord . so do not be sad .
but they denied him , so they will be among the arraigned ,
return to your lord , well-pleased and pleasing ,
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
is he whose breast allah has opened to islam , so that he follows a light from his lord ? then woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of allah ! they are in manifest error .
we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot and we found in him no constancy .
and give to them the laws of the fire , in the midst of the fire ; they will say , “ our lord ! do not give us the good news of the deeds of hell ; and what is the matter with us , if he wills ? ” and it will be said to them , “ be , the punishment of the burning . ”
or do they say , he invented it ? say , then bring a surah like it and call uponwhomever you can besides allah , if you should be truthful .
he had already warned them of our punishment , but they disputed the warning .
like the fate of the people of noah , and aad , and thamood , and those after them . god does not want injustice for his servants .
and we had already tried before them the people of pharaoh , and there came to them a noble messenger ,
how can there be for them an admonition , when a messenger evidently had come to them ,
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
do you not see how allah has made you look in the earth , and has subjected for you all that is in the sea , in the morning and in the sea ? and it is the command of allah that he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
these are the verses of the clear book .
and to us belong the last and the first .
so announce to them a painful punishment~
on that day man will ask , where can i escape ?
and as for the qasitun , they shall be firewood for hell ,
and the mountains stakes ?
for solidarity among the quraysh ,
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
and he it is who hath produced you from a single being , and hath appointed for you a place of residingand a place of storageor in your father 's loins ] . verily we have propounded unto a people who understand .
say : is thatbetter or the garden of eternity promised to the righteous ? it is their recompense and their destination .
say , “ are you apprising god of your faith , when god knows everything in the heavens and earth ? god has knowledge of everything . ”
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
by the snorting chargers , whose hoofs strike against the rocks
god will guide the blind and the pure . he whom god leads astray , he leads astray , and he leads to the right path . god is in clear error .
and the sea set aflame .
or , when it beholds the punishment , it would say , “ if only i could be sent back , so that i may be among the doers of good . ”
a warning to mankind ,
and after them , we made a party of the people of the youth , and we made the two parties to follow them ; and on the contrary , we have given them a scripture , and if they are a thing to be a thing , then surely the abode of the hereafter is better , and the abode of the hereafter is better for those who take heed .
there is thereinfor thee not to go hungry nor to go naked ,
said moosa , “ o haroon – what prevented you when you saw them going astray ? ”
lo ! ye , even so , do thou love them , and they have been commanded . but when they are , they say : we believe ; but when ye are alone , then say : lo ! we are in the breasts of the breasts . say : lo ! allah is aware of what is in the breasts .
the notables among them announced , “ go on , and hold fast to your gods ; this is something planned . ”
do not groan today . you will receive no help from us .
say , lord , i seek your protection against the strong temptations of the devils .
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and he forbids indecency and evil and rebellion . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
so allah saved him from the evils that they plotted , while an evil punishment encompassed pharaoh 's people .
he is the conqueror over his servants . he sends guardians over you until , when death comes to one of you , our messengers take him , and they do not neglect .
the indubitable !
and it sailed with them amid waves like mountains ; and noah called out to his son , who stood aloof , “ o my son ! embark with us , and do not be with the disbelievers . ”
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
so leave them in their intoxication till a time .
and vie with the others ;
so taste , because you forgot the meeting of this day of yours ; we have forgotten you ; and taste the abiding punishment for what you used to do .
i will cast him into hell-fire
and those who emigrated for the sake of allah after they had been wronged , we will surely settle them in a good place in the world , and surely the reward of the hereafter is greater , if they but knew .
blessed is he in whose hand is the kingdom , and he has power over all things ,
for them are glad tidings , in the life of the world and in the hereafter . no change can there be in the words of allah . that is the supreme triumph .
indeed , your lord is ever watchful .
when they entered upon him , they said , ‘ peace ! ’ he answered , ‘ peace ! ’ ‘ peace ! ’
follow what has been sent down to you from your lord and do not follow any protector other than him . little do you remember .
and where will you be afflicted by death , and what is the matter with you , if you should say , ‘ this is indeed a manifest proof from allah ? ’
say , ‘ whoever is an enemy of gabrielit is he who has brought it down to your heart by allah ’ s command , confirming what preceded it , and guidance and good news for the faithful . ’
until you visit the graves .
and to warn those who say : allah has taken a son .
lord , we have heard a caller calling to the faith saying , believe in your lord . we have believed in him . our lord , forgive us our sins and remove from us our bad deeds and make us die with the pious ones .
or was he not informed of what is in the scrolls of moses ?
and those who follow the speech of the book , shall be inspired in it ; what is revealed to them is only by the command of their lord , and he will make them free from justice , and he will inform them of what they did ; and they are the ones who have faith .
we maderefuse a wet nurse . so his sister said : shall i show you a household that will rear him for you and take care of him ?
then we appointed you viceroys in the earth after them , that we might see how ye behave .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
and they were guided to goodly speech , and they were guided to the path of the all-laudable .
as for the likeness of those they say , they are the ones who say : 'here , in the course of the book , that is the book ; that which is the book shall be in the book . that is the law of allah , and they will not be able to invent lies .
they say : why is not a sign sent down to him from his lord ? say , indeed , allah is able to send down a sign , but most of them do not know .
enjoin ye righteousness upon mankind , and forgetyourselves , and yet ye study the scripture ? have ye no sense ?
on that day the heavens will become like molten brass ,
in them are good and beautiful ones .
then , if they turn away , thy dutyis but plain conveyance .
their cry therein will be : hallowed be thou ! o allah ! and their greeting therein will be : peace ! and the end of their cry will be : praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
and protect them from the evil consequences . and whoever you protect from evil deeds , on that day , you will have had mercy upon him , and that is the supreme success .
and saved them and their people from the great distress ,
how will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs ?
their only words were : 'lord , forgive us our sins and our excesses ' and make our foothold firm , and help us against the unbelieving people .
then your lord declared that he would send against them , until the day of resurrection , those who would inflict terrible suffering upon them . your lord is swift in retribution , yet he is forgiving and merciful .
and they say , “ o you who received the message , you are insane . ”
those , they are the unbelievers , the immoral .
that was a nation that has passed away ; they shall have what they earned and you shall have what you earn , and you shall not be called upon to answer for what they did .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , then it will be said to them , “ it is a she-camel . we will bring it forth from it , and a mixture of kafoor is different from it . in the least , it will be a different of the people who have faith . in this way , the people of the woods will pass away . ”
and to that fact he bears witness ;
and a multitude of the later people .
the likeness of those who take protectors other than allah is that of the spider , who buildsa house ; but verily the flimsiest of houses is the house of the spider , if they but knew .
he would have led us far away from our gods if we had not been steadfast to them . they will know , when they see the punishment , who is farthest astray inway .
then he called upon his lord : these are a people given to sin .
do not rise up against god , i come to you with clear authority .
and to allah only belongs the truth , and those who call upon other than him shall be the true . but woe to those who deny the truth , it is only in the morning .
we created them not save with a purpose , but most of them know not .
sad . by the qur'an full of admonition .
say : allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but again you ascribe partners .
who sees you when you rise
who set up along with allah anot her god ; presently they shall know .
and recall what time ibrahim said unto his father azar : takest thou idols for gods ? verily i see thee and thy people in error manifest .
and among his signs are the ships that run on the sea like mountains .
they said , call upon your lord to make clear to us what it is . he answered , god says she should be neither too old nor too old , but in between , so do as you are commanded .
and if they incline towards peace , then incline towards it , and put your trust in allah . indeed , he is the hearing , the knowing .
and we send down from the quran that which is a healing and a mercy to those who believe , and it adds only to the ruin of the wrong-doers .
and when they are admonished , they pay no attention .
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
remind , if the reminder can be of benefit .
and lo ! we shall make all that is thereon a barren mound .
a party of the people of the book would love to lead you astray , but they only lead themselves astray , and they do not realize it .
and in whatever thing you disagree , its ruling isto allah . that is allah , my lord . in him , i have put my trust , and to him i turn in repentance .
for those who call the call of their lord , they shall have a happy place of bliss and a place of bliss . if only , the earth is true , they will be the ones who have taken their trust in the earth . it is they who are the worst to take account .
save those who repent before ye overpower them . for know that allah is forgiving , merciful .
say : the angel of death , who is set over you , will cause you to die , then to your lord you shall be returned .
if you have any plans , use them .
and round about them willboys of everlasting youth . if you see them , you would think them scattered pearls .
and they denied them , though their souls acknowledged them , wrongfully and out of pride . so behold , how was the end of the workers of corruption !
when my servants ask you about me , i am near . i answer the supplication of the suppliant when he calls to me ; so let them respond to me , and let them believe in me , in order that they may be led aright .
we have made it a quran in arabic , that you may understand .
the revelation of this book is from allah , the mighty , the wise .
and it was said , 'earth , swallow up your waters . ' o heaven , the water subsided , and the waters subsided , and the affair was accomplished , and the ark came to rest on thejudiyy .
sovereign of the day of recompense .
and you can not escape from allahin the earth , and besides allah you have neither any walinor any helper .
pharaoh said , if you take any god other than me , i will certainly make you one of thosein prison .
wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness .
allah will make them swear by allah , they said : surely , if we bring a clear proof to you , they will believe in you . say , ‘ indeed it is only allah , to whom you will have no faith . maybe you will believe in it . ’
that misjudgement , which you entertained about your lord ruined you . so you became losers .
and this is how they did not have any power to do so , and when they see our punishment , then surely they have no faith in it . indeed , it is allah 's who will never believe in him .
he said , ‘ it is so , your lord says , ‘ it is easy for me , and i created you before , when you were nothing . ’
we have explainedin variousin this qur'an , in order that they may receive admonition , but it only increased their aversion .
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
those who were proud will say to those who were deemed weak : was it we who prevented you from the guidance after it had come to you ? rather , you yourselves were criminals .
who set up with allah another god . so cast him ye twain into the torment severe .
he said , “ as for him who does wrong , we will punish him ; then he will be returned to his lord , and he will punish him with a terrible punishment . ”
then they debated with one another what they must do , and they kept their talk secret .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
they said , woe to us ! we have been unjust .
musasaid : even if i bring you something manifest ?
are going to be assembled on the appointed time of a day known .
those who exchange blasphemy for faith will not harm god in the least , and for them is a painful punishment .
so he has no friend here today ,
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to him is the homecoming .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
my guardian is god who has revealed the book , and he takes care of the righteous .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he gives life and causes things to die . he has power over all things .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all seekers .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud !
allah—there is no god except him—will surely gather you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . and who is more truthful than allah in statement ?
you are but a warner .
what is promised will surely come to pass .
this is because your lord would not destroy the towns unjustly while their people were unaware .
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
o prophet ! say to those captives who are in your hands : if allah knows any good in your hearts , he will give you better than what has been taken from you , and he will forgive you . allah is forgiving , merciful .
and who is better in religion than one who submits himself wholly to allah , and is virtuous , and follows the religion of ibrahimhanifa ? and allah took abraham for a friend .
and we helped him against the people who denied our signs ; surely they were an evil people , so we drowned them all .
when it is said to them , “ when you have spoken about the matter , or fear , or regret , it will be revealed to you . but if you speak the truth , it will be revealed to the prophet , or there is a sign for the noble messengers . ”
this is the result of your deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
and fight them until there is no persecution , and the religion is allah 's ; then if they desist , there shall be no aggression except against the oppressors .
say : i have no power over any harm or benefit for myself , except what allah may will . for every nation there is an appointed time . when their time comes , they can not delay it by a single hour nor can they advance it .
and when they commit an indecency , they say : we found our fathers doing this , and allah has enjoined it on us . say : surely allah does not enjoin indecency . do you say of allah what you do not know ?
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
if you disbelieve , how will you avoid the day which will make children grey-headed ?
as for the children of israel , the covenant of the children of israel is revealed to you , and their hearts are in wide , and talk in their hearts . they will speak to you , but only a few of them do not speak . god is a pagan .
and also in the way of allah , is as the means of allah ; so he is the most honourable , the most honourable ; and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
and leg will be joined with another leg
and fear him who created you and all the earlier people .
on that day man will be informed of what he sent ahead and left behind .
have they not observed the things god has created , casting their shadows right and left , prostrating themselves before god in all humility ?
he said : 'help me , lord , they belie me '
and that which you give in usury , in order that it may increase the creditors ’ property , does not increase with allah ; but what you give in zakah , seeking allah ’ s pleasure—it is they who will be given a manifold increase .
verily we ! we have sent it down on the night of power .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind even if they do not see ?
said zachariah , 'lord , appoint for me a similitude . ' said he , 'is the source of the command of god , to the exclusion of the people ' he said , 'follow your lord , and celebrate the praises of your lord in the early morning . '
if the unbelievers only knew when they will not be able to ward off the fire from their faces and from their backs , nor will they be helped .
and those who guard their private parts
and lest you should say , “ if only we had the book been given to them , we would have been better than these , and who is the clear one , so who does greater wrong than the signs of your lord ? ” so it is , we will support them from the ayatof allah , and he will punish them with a painful punishment .
and acacia covered with heaps of bloom ,
and when i have fashioned him and breathed into him of my spirit , fall ye down in obeisance unto him .
and we saved those who believed and were pious .
o ye who believe ! bow down and prostrate yourselves , and worship your lord , and do good , that haply ye may fare well .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
so , when the time for the first of the twocame came , we sent against you our servants full of martial might , who ravagedcountry , and it was a promise performed .
, eat of the good things we have provided for you , but do not transgress lest my wrath should descend upon you . he upon whom my wrath descends has fallen .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
o you who believe ! shall i show you a bargain which will save you from a painful punishment ?
verily the vilest of moving creatures with allah are those who disbelieve-wherefore they shall not believe-
the pious ones will rest amid the shade , springs ,
verily the hypocrites shall be in the lowest abyss of the fire ; and thou wilt not find for them a helper .
we sent a shower of stones upon them , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
they were near to seducing thee from that we revealed to thee , that thou mightest forge against us another , and then they would have taken thee as a friend ;
neither heaven nor earth wept over them , nor were they reprieved .
and similarly , we have appointed for every prophet an enemy -- devils from men and jinn , who inspire one another with deceitful talk . but had your lord willed , they would not have done it ; so leave them to their fabrications .
do you think he is upon guidance ?
they said , ‘ it is the same to us whether you exhort us or not ,
say : travel in the land , and see what was the end of those before . most of them were idolaters .
he brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living , and he revives the earth after its death . likewise you will be resurrected .
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
it is a written record .
but they called their companion , and he took and hamstrung .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
so he will be in pleasant living .
cleaving , as one , the centre ,
and what will show you what is illeeyun ?
when the wife of 'imran said , “ my lord , i have pledged to you what is in my womb , to be devoted to your exclusive service . accept it from me . you are all-hearing and all-knowing . ”
unfattening , unappeasing hunger .
that allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness , and punish the hypocrites if he will , or relent toward them . lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
the foolish among the people will say , what has turned them away from the qiblah which they formerly observed ? say : to allah belong the east and the west . he guides whom he wills to a straight path .
except the sincere and devoted servants of allah .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and allah propoundeth for those who believe the similitude of the wife of fir'awn , when she said : my lord ! build for me a house with thee in the garden , and deliver me from fir'awn and his work , and deliver me from the transgressing people .
those are the ones in whose hand is the right hand ; they shall flow from beneath it , and shall be made to wear in fine wear of it ; and upon them shall be the garment of fine , and in it they shall be poured forth .
the knower of the unseen and the seen , the almighty , the wise .
the heavens will have openings like doors .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
and when we said to the angels : prostrate yourselves before adam , they all prostrated themselves except iblis ; he refused and was proud and was one of the disbelievers .
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like yourselves . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you speak truly .
but they hamstrung her and then regretted it .
that he may make clear to them that wherein they differ , and that those who disbelieve might know that they were liars .
none dispute concerning the revelations of allah save those who disbelieve , so let not their going to and fro in the cities deceive thee .
god has not taken to himself any son , nor is there any god besides him ; otherwise , each god would have taken away what he created , and some of them would assuredly have overcome others . glory be to god , above that they describe !
for when it was said to them : there is no god but allah , they were arrogant
but they denied him , so we saved him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who denied our signs . indeed , they were a blind people .
the people of the book are the people of the book . if some of the people of the book desire to be given the book , some of the people of the book would say , the record of the people who are given the lie invent a lie .
a host routed out there of the factions .
nor did we feed the destitute .
they await but a single cry , which will not grantany respite .
they will bear the full weight of their own burdens on the day of resurrection , and some of the burdens of those whom they mislead without knowledge . evil is what they bear !
the charitable men and charitable women , who have loaned god a loan of righteousness—it will be multiplied for them , and for them is a generous reward .
and when the good news of your daughter came , he was brought down to it , so that it may be a source of strength from the sky , so that it may be , with the commands of allah , and it may be that he is .
and by the angels who regulate the affairs , .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will tremble , and the mountains turn into dunes of flowing sand .
when you prayed to your lord for help , he answered , i am sending to your aid a thousand angels in succession .
you did not hope that the book would be given to you except as a mercy from your lord . do not be a supporter of the unbelievers .
on the day when the earth and the mountains will tremble , and the mountains turn into dunes of flowing sand .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they were not sent to be guardians over them .
and it is allah who sends the winds , and they raise a cloud , then we drive it towards a dead land , and revive therewith the earth after its death . likewise is the resurrection .
fill your bellies with it ,
and take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was penitent .
the dwellers of the fire will call to the companions of paradise : 'pour on us some water or some of that which allah has provided you ' they will reply : 'allah has forbidden them to the unbelievers
and guided them to a straight path .
and when the prayer is ended , disperse in the land and seek the bounty of allah , and remember allah much , that you may be successful .
we sent messengers to the ancient people who lived before you .
so he threw it down , and lo ! it was a rapidly moving snake .
as for the thief , male or female , cut off their hands as a meed for that which they have earned ; a punishment from allah , and allah is mighty , wise .
and beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively , and know that god is severe in retribution .
say , o my servants who have believed , fear your lord . for those who do good in this world is good , and allah 's earth is spacious . indeed , those who persevere will be requited without measure .
will ye be left secure in that which is here before us ,
do you call on ba'lanand abandon the best creator ,
when he called upon his lord in low tones , saying ,
and we shall certainly make them taste a lesser punishment before the greater punishment , so that perhaps they may return to us .
they said , by allah , we swear to one another that will attack him and his family by night , then we will say to his heir , ‘ we did not witness the destruction of his family , and we are indeed truthful . ’
who deniedand turned away .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
surely their lord will be aware of their .
our provision for you will never be exhausted .
it is naught but a revelation revealed ,
believers , obey god and his messenger , and do not turn away from him when you hear .
when the book came to them , we sent down the torah , and explained it in its light . then , they have been commanded to judge with the others , and say : 'the book of god has been sent down to those of you who have been obedient to god . they are the ones who have no knowledge of this .
and we will surely let man see the mother of maryam , and if they are the ones of the believers , then surely , should they have been the believers . so do not be of the ones who have been given knowledge .
the knower of the invisible and the visible , the great , the high high .
if we willed , we could take away what we have revealed to you , then you would find none to help you against us ,
why do the rabbis and religious scholars not forbid them from saying what is sinful and devouring what is unlawful ? evil is what they have been doing .
and the people of noah before . indeed , they were a transgressing lot .
what , do they consider you a mercy from your lord , which we provide for them in the life of this world , so that they may be among the witnesses ?
on the day the punishment will cover them from above them and from underneath their feet , and he will say : taste what you used to do .
he said , ‘ i swear by allah ! indeed , he has forged that which you wished to be one of the other . rather , it is a thing to which you could be one of the other . but the most of them do not have any faith in it , except for the good things of his lord . then , they gave the lie to his lord , and then they will be asked for the right forgiveness .
then they departed , to the people where they had been sent down . they have no knowledge at all , but they have no knowledge in the least . moses said , if what you wanted is true .
then we produced for you therewith gardens of palms and vines , yielding abundant fruit for you to eat .
and the inhabitants of midian . and moses was denied . so i prolonged enjoyment for the disbelievers ; then i seized them , and howwas my reproach .
and that the final end is unto thy lord ,
say , “ it is a message of great importance .
then he turned back and was proud ;
alif lam ra . these are the verses of the clear book .
he said , “ i have preferred the love of good things better than the remembrance of my lord , until the horses disappeared from sight . ”
abraham was an exemplary leader , obedient to god and upright , and not one of idolaters ,
and if we had decreed for them : lay down your lives or to go forth from your homes , but few of them would have done it ; and if they had done what they had done , it would be better for them , and more strengthening .
and that it is he who created the two kinds—the male and the female ,
o ye who believe ! remember allah 's favour unto you when a people determined to stretch forth their hands against you , but he withheld their hands from you ; and fear allah , and in allah let the believers put their trust .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
“ this is what you were promised—for every careful penitent .
and allah created the heavens and the earth in truth and that every soul may be recompensed for what it has earned , and they will not be wronged .
glory be to your lord , the lord of honor , above what they describe .
the intercession of the intercessors shall then be of no avail to them .
they solemnly swear that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any other nation . but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
true sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
are they better or the people of tubba ' and those before them ? we destroyed them , for surely they were guilty .
so when he had left them and those they worshipped besides allah , we gave him isaac and jacob , and each one of them we made a prophet .
and those who do evil will be thrown headlong into the fire – their faces will be thrown down on their faces ; are you being recompensed except for what you used to do ? ”
save those who believe and do good works , and remember allah much , and defend themselves after they have been wronged . and those who do wrong will come to know by what overturning they will be overturned .
for them is torment in the life of the world , and indeed the punishment of the hereafter is the most severe ; and none is hidden from allah .
yet before this the book of moses was a guide and a mercy ; and this is a book in the arabic language , which confirms it , to warn the evildoers , and to give good tidings to the good-doers ,
saying : we believe in the lord of the worlds , -
read in the name of your lord who created ,
have we not expanded thee thy breast ? -
then we relegated him to the lowest of the low ,
and he will forgive you your sins , and will grant you respite till a specified term . and allah 's term , when it comes , can not be deferred , if you only knew . '
whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies allah , and he is the mighty , the wise .
say thou : it hath been revealed unto me that a company of the jinn listened , and said : lo ! we have heard a marvellous qur'an .
and they say , “ if we were to follow the guidance among us , we would have been guided by the right course ; therefore i shall keep it on account of the qur ’ an , so that it is we who are the giver . ”
so we took retribution from them ; then see how was the end of the deniers .
say : ' i will surely tell you what you are commanded ' say : ' i will be revealed to you that god is the one god . so do not ask forgiveness for the unbelievers '
so that you may not grieve for what has escaped you , nor be exultant at what he has given you . allah does not love the vainglorious , the boastful ,
the people of the woods were also like the example of the jews . the example of the human being has also been differing about them . he has also told them the meaning of their deeds . but if the matter is decided from your lord , he will take them away , for they will have faith in this .
god commands justice , and kindness , and giving to relatives , and he forbids indecency and evil and rebellion . he admonishes you so that you may take heed .
so that the people of the book may know that they have no power over the grace of allah , and that the bounty is in allah 's hand ; he bestows it on whomsoever he wills . and allah is the owner of great bounty .
we have sent you only as a bearer of glad tidings and as a warner .
indeed , the hour is coming - i almost conceal it - so that every soul may be recompensed for its labors .
if you ask them for help , you will certainly be your enemies . if you are telling the truth , it would be better for you , but if you do not , then it will be said to god , the true one .
we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they refused to bear it and were afraid of it ; but man carried it . he was unfair and ignorant .
those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers , then go back on what they said , must free a slave before they touch one another . that is what you are exhorted to do . god is aware of the things you do .
so what is the matter with us that if we were to turn away , then indeed , he is the one who has come to you with a straight path , so that we might be responsible for what they have been seeking , and be patient .
they said , 'salih , thou hast hitherto been a source of hope among us . what , dost thou forbid us to serve what our fathers worshipped ? ' we are suspicious of what thou callest us to .
and is he on whom you shall be successors in the midst of the gardens and of the watersprings with streams of water flowing beneath you ? in this wise , we have set forth a sign for them ; so this is how allah makes clear to us a sign , so that allah may make clear to him a sign .
and if thou speakest aloud , then lo ! he knoweth the secretandmore hidden .
and what will explain to you what the day of decision is ?
and recall what time thy lord revealed unto the angels : lo ! i am a plain warner unto you , so be thou patient with the truth . lo ! i fear for you the truth .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
and even scals we appointed unto every prophet an enemy from among the culprits ; and thine lord sufficeth as guide and helper .
and as for those whose scale will be light , they are the ones who will lose their ownselvesbecause they used to wrong our verses .
on that day , friends will be enemies of one another , except for the righteous .
these are accounts of the unseen , which we reveal to you . you did not know them nor did your people before this . so be patient . the outcome is for the pious .
and the sun and the moon are joined together ,
those who deny the day of recompense .
and couldst thou behold when the angels take away the souls of those who disbelieve , striking their faces and their backs : taste the torment of the burning .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
a host routed out there of the factions .
and he is the forgiving , the loving ,
it is he who has made you see what you have been concealing , and the sun and the moon . and he made the sun and the moon to be settled . it is only he who has made the night and the day to be a respite . it is he who will grant them a prolonged time .
the lord of moses and aaron . '
and god was gracious to us , and guarded us against the chastisement of the burning wind ;
and if they were to be afflicted by any harm , then there came to you the same , and it was the same to the call of allah , and we had made it a portent ; and allah does not love the unjust .
boiling water , and cast into the fire .
who created me , and heguides me .
it is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and in the hereafter they are the greatest losers .
indeed the first house to be set up for mankind is the one at bakkah , blessed and a guidance for the nations .
those who disbelieve in the signs of allah and slay the prophets without right , and slay those who bid to justice , give them glad tidings of a painful punishment .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and we inspired moses and his brother , “ settle your people in egypt , and make your houses places of worship , and perform the prayer , and give good news to the believers . ”
those , they are the unbelievers , the immoral .
who have divided themselves into various religious sects , each one happy with their own belief .
save him who repenteth and believeth and worketh righteous work . as for such , allah will change their evil deeds into good deeds , and allah is ever forgiving , merciful .
he it is who created you , but one of you is an unbeliever and one of you is a believer ; and allah sees what you do .
we created man from an extract of clay .
this is the way of the life to come . in fact , it is the tradition of god . it is the same for you . it is the same for you to have the right direction . this is the law of god , the lord of the universe .
and we have made this qur ’ an easy in your language , for them to understand .
and among them are some who say : our lord ! give us good in this world and good in the hereafter , and save us from the torment of the fire .
we made a covenant with adam before , but he forgot and we found in him no constancy .
god will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into gardens beneath which rivers flow . god does what he wills .
and from among their fathers and their descendants and their brethren , and we chose them and guided them to a straight path .
and thou shalt see the sinners that day coupled in fetters ,
but they will never long for it , because of what their hands have sent before them . allah is aware of the wrongdoers .
the companions of paradise on that day will be better lodged , and more fairly accommodated .
marry those who are single among you , and the righteous among your male and female slaves ; if they are poor , god will enrich them of his bounty ; god is all-embracing , all-knowing .
we know those of you who have gone before and those who will come after you .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
say : who is it that delivereth you from the darknesses of the land and the sea , when ye cry unto him in humility and in secrecy : if he delivered us from this , we shall surely be of the thankful ?
or did they create the heavens and the earth ? nay , but they have no firm belief .
god blights usury and blesses charitable deeds . god does not love the ungrateful wrongdoer .
she said : how can i have a son when no mortal has touched me , nor have i been unchaste ?
and he will return to his family joyfully .
he said , “ my lord , help me , for they have denied me . ”
nay , but that day they shall submit ;
we have indeed created man in the best of moulds ,
and your devotions amidst the worshipers .
what led you into the scorching fire ?
have they not seen what is in the heavens and the earth , and they will not be able to answer them ? but it is the word to come upon them , or there is a sign for them in the earth .
verily we shall inherit the earth and whatsoever is thereon : and unto us they shall be returned .
he will say , ‘ by allah , you had almost ruined me !
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
and we had not given them books which they could study , nor sent to them before you any warner .
and if it is the book of the people of the book and the disbelievers who have been sent by the tongue of allah , they say : is it not that the signs of our signs should be recited to those who have faith ? in fact , the qur'an is a manifest prescription for those who have no faith .
he will live a pleasant life .
and observe the weight with equity and do not make deficient the balance .
but they hamstrung her . hesaid , enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days . this is a promise not to be belied .
and what harm would it have done them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has given them ? allah knows them well .
but they who do not desire to make a breach with allah , and they ascribe a lie to it , and ascribe a lie to them . indeed , it is the hereafter that they are going to be thrown into hell , and they will be thrown into hell .
and do not eat up your property among yourselves in vanity , nor give bribery to the rulersthat you may knowingly eat up a portion of the property of others sinfully .
and the evils of what they did will appear to them , and they will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at !
and when they returned to their people they returned jesting ;
and what harm would it have done them if they had believed in allah and the last day and spent out of what allah has given them ? allah knows them well .
they said : our lord ! place a word between us and the people of the calf , so we made them mention of the people of the qur'an : verily , in this there is a sign for people who have done evil .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
on the day when he will call to them , and say , “ where are my associates whom you used to claim ? ”
and we brought the others close to that place .
furthermore i call to witness the setting of the stars , -
and he propoundeth for us a similitude , and forgetteth his creation . he saith : who shall quicken the bones when they are decayed ?
he said : these are my guests , so do not disgrace me .
why did not the believers , men and women , when you heard it , think well of their own people , and say , this is an obvious falsehood ?
o ye who believe ! take your precaution , then sally forth in detachment or sally forth all together .
they will know tomorrow who is the insolent liar .
aaron had already told them before , o my people , you are being tested by this . your lord is the beneficent god . follow me and obey my order .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
who reckon that they shall meet their lord and that unto him they are returning .
has the story of moses been given to you , the people of moses ? the people of the book are only aware of their own selves . the people who have submitted themselves to god will certainly have no knowledge about it . they have the right to do so .
then why do you not restore it , if you are not subject
we seized them with the punishment , but they did not surrender to their lord , nor do they pray ,
he said , “ shall i seek for you a god other than allah , when he has favored you over all other people ? ”
so fear god as much as you can , and listen , and obey , and spend , that is better for yourselves . those who are saved from their own greed will have everlasting happiness .
let man consider his food .
scrambling towards the caller ; the disbelievers will say , “ this is a difficult day . ”
those who have believed and migrated and waged jihad in the way of allah and those who gave shelter and aided - it is they who are the true believers . for them is forgiveness and noble provision .
but none is granted it except those who are patient , and none is granted it except the greatly endowed .
while the hereafter is better and more lasting .
believers , if you obey the unbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels , and you will turn back losers .
so will it be . and whoever retaliates with the like of what he has been made to suffer , and then is aggressed againstthereafter , allah will surely help him . indeed allah is all-excusing , all-forgiving .
but the disbelievers rejected , and we delivered him and those with him in the ark , and we drowned those who were with him in the ark . then how was the end of those who have been warned ?
yes , if you are patient and godfearing , and the enemy comes rushing at you suddenly your lord will help you with five thousand angels marked .
everyone on earth is destined to die .
what ! do you , then , not tell me , what happened to me , when he said to them , ‘ what is your allah ’ s truth ? ’ they said , ‘ we worship what abraham and jesus , and the one ’ s noble messenger . ’
and to allah only belongs the kingship of the heavens and the earth ; and on the day when the hour comes , those who follow falsehood will be the losers .
within a few years . to allah belongs the command before and after . and on that day the believers will rejoice
there is a ban on the contrary after this , no more than the torah that he has made . to each other is the result of their deeds . if they had thought , they would surely have to go back to each other .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
do men think that they will be left alone on saying , we believe , and not be tried ?
therein are fruit and palm-trees sheathed .
say : believe in it or do not believe . indeed , those who were given knowledge before it , when it is recited to them , they fall down on their faces in prostration
you can not make the dead hear , nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they have turned their backs retreating .
and besides these two , there are two other gardens , -
so do not obey the deniers ,
he will pray for utter destruction
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
i seek not any provision from them , nor do i desire that they should feed me .
and between them is a partition , and on the elevations are men who recognize everyone by their features . they will call to the dwellers of the garden , “ peace be upon you. ” they have not entered it , but they are hoping .
so she conceived him , and she withdrew with him to a far place .
and for those who disbelieve in their lord there is the torment of hell ; and what an evil destination !
in their hearts was the example of abraham . in this there is a lesson for him who wishes to be godwary , and he who turns away from the path of god , will have the power to do so . he who does good will be the real .
indeed , we left a clear sign for a nation that understands .
and he said to the one he thought would be saved , ‘ mention me to your master. ’ but satan made him forget to mention him to his master , so he remained in prison for several years .
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
or enjoins piety ?
and when they saw them , they said , “ these people are lost . ”
god raised him up to himself . god is majestic and all-wise .
'come out to your tillage if you want to reap '
and we sent among them warners ;
to us they will all return .
and grieve thou not over them nor be straitened because of that which they plot .
he said : therein ye shall live and therein ye shall die , and therefrom ye shall be brought forth .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
we called to him , abraham ,
and we put coverings over their hearts lest they should understand it , and deafness in their ears . and when you mention your lord alone in the qur'an , they turn their backs in aversion .
we are your friends in this life and in the hereafter , and in it you will have whatever your souls desire , and you will have therein whatever you call for .
they said : in allah do we put our trust . our lord ! make us not a trial for the wrong-doing people ,
and indeed , it is the truth of certainty .
say : o you who are jews , if you claim that you are the favourites of allah to the exclusion of all other people , then long for death if you are truthful .
the clatterer !
like the custom of the people of pharaoh and those before them . they denied our signs , so allah seized them for their sins . and allah is severe in punishment .
disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest , as if they were being driven to death while they looked on .
repel evil with that which is better . we are best aware of that which they allege .
have you not regarded your opinion of the one whom allah has given to him as he was grateful to him ? he said , ‘ i do indeed give you a clear authority ! ’ he said , ‘ allah has indeed the power to bring forth the sun and the moon . indeed , allah does not guide the harmdoers '
he said , “ throw it , o moses . ”
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth . god has power over all things .
say , ‘ it is allah who gives you life , then causes you to die , then he will assemble you on the day of resurrection , about which there is no doubt . but most people do not know . ’
those who are constant at their prayers
the day that the wrong-doer will bite at his hands , he will say , oh , would that i had taken a way with the messenger !
she certainly desired him , and he would have desired her were he not to witness the proof of his lord . thusthat we might turn away from him evil and indecency , surely he was one of our sincere servants .
and i will give them respite . my plan is firm .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
those who believe and do good deeds , their lord will guide them because of their faith . rivers will flow beneath them in the gardens of bliss .
he said , “ the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you have faith . ”
so do not bring to him the true direction of the believers . what is the matter with you that you may go about a party of the people of understanding who have knowledge about it ? so that they may be rightly guided .
said zachariah , 'lord , appoint for me a similitude . ' said he , 'is the source of the command of god , to the exclusion of the people ' he said , 'follow your lord , and celebrate the praises of your lord in the early morning . '
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
and by the night when it darkens ,
he can not be questioned as to what he does , but they will be questioned .
and whoever does not respond to allah ’ s summoner , he can not frustrate him in the earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
o ye who believe ! when ye meet those who disbelieve in battle , turn not your backs to them .
to the people of 'ad , their brother hud : “ o you people , worship god for you have no other god but he . this is a clear revelation from your lord , so that you may be condemned by the means of god .
who wants to expel you from your land , so what do you advise ?
to pharaoh and his council , but they behaved superciliously and they were a tyrannical lot .
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
and assuredly we have propounded for mankind in this qur'an every kind of similitude ; and if thou bringest unto them a sign , those who disbelieve will surely say : ye are but followers of falsehood .
“ set out with my servants by night—you will be followed .
verily we are about to bring down upon the inhabitants of this city a torment from the sky because they are evil-livers .
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
verily it shall close upon them ,
“ ask the town where we were , and the caravan in which we came . we are being truthful . ”
and this is my straight path ; so follow it , and do not follow other paths , for they will scatter you away from his way ; this is what he has enjoined upon you , so that you may guard yourselves . ”
and by the night when it darkens ,
andhis saying , o my lord , indeed these are a people who do not believe .
on the day when the hour sets in , the guilty will swear that they did not tarry but an hour : thus were they perverted .
kaf , ha , ya , 'ayn , sad .
what is the matter with you , that you will not be able to receive a lesson from god . whatever is in the heavens and the earth is god 's , and it is the law of god . it is the true laws of law . god has the power to do so .
o people , you have been born on the day of your lord when he has begotten a son . the words of god will not be able to make a son . the promise of god is true . so do not let the torment of the hereafter deceive you .
and tell them of the guests of abraham ,
the repentant , the worshippers , the praisers , the travelers , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , those who prostrate themselves , who enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong , and keep the ordinances of allah .
and obey allah and the apostle so that you may be grantedmercy .
and the hereafter is better for you than the first .
has the reminder been cast upon him from among us ? rather , he is a self-conceited liar .
they said : by allah ! thou wilt not cease remembering yusuf until thou art wizened or thou be of the dead .
wherein they will live forever . it is the true promise of god . he is majestic and all-wise .
and they denied our signs utterly .
have they been created by nothing , or are they their own creators ?
and of his signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the difference of your languages and colours . indeed in that are signs for those of knowledge .
thus it is more likely that they will give true testimony , or fear that other oaths will be taken after their oaths . so fear god , and listen ; god does not guide the disobedient people .
and those who believe in allah and his messengers , they are the loyal and the martyrs , with their lord . for them is their reward and their light . as for those who disbelieve and deny our verses , they are owners of hell-fire .
true sovereignty on that day will belong to the merciful , and it will be a hard day for the disbelievers .
the women of women shall be divorced , so be thou exposed to the sun and the moon , so be thou not permitted unto them , and that which allah hath created , if they are to believe in allah and the last day ; and if they are to give their share in the life of the world , then verily they are unto the tillage of the hereafter .
the day the trumpet blast is sounded we shall raise the sinners blind ,
and abundant fruit ,
and the earth throws out its burdens ,
a provision for you and your cattle .
and yusuf'sbrethren came and they entered unto him , and he recognized them , but they recognized him not .
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
see you not those who dispute concerning the signs of allah ? how are they turned away ?
do you not see how allah has made you look in the earth , and has subjected for you all that is in the sea , in the morning and in the sea ? and it is the command of allah that he is the most forgiving , the most merciful .
you are not a warden over them ,
say : 'travel in the land and see how he originated creation . then god will bring about the everlasting life . god has power over all things .
those of the children of israel who were bent on denying the truth were cursed by david and jesus , the son of mary , because they disobeyed and were insolent .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
we relate to you their story in truth . they were youths who believed in their lord , and we increased them in guidance .
when god alone is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter shrink with aversion , but when others are mentioned apart from god , they are filled with joy .
this is a reminder . the righteous will have a good place of return .
and similarly , we have appointed for every prophet an enemy -- devils from men and jinn , who inspire one another with deceitful talk . but had your lord willed , they would not have done it ; so leave them to their fabrications .
the notables among them announced , “ go on , and hold fast to your gods ; this is something planned . ”
so turn away from them , and say : peace . but they will come to know .
and they persecuted them for naught save that they believed in allah , the mighty , the praiseworthy ,
he said to the angels , “ i am in the earth , a sign . the angels say , ‘ is there a sign for you in this matter ? ’ ‘ and what is the matter with the guilty ? indeed , we will inform you about what you do not know . ’
and they will call , o malik , let your lord make an end of us . he will say , indeed , you will remain .
or thou have a garden of date-palms and grapes , and cause rivers to gush forth therein abundantly ;
the jews say : ezra is the son of god . the christians say , the son of god is the son of god . that is what they say with their tongues before their very eyes . how perverse they are !
and the sun and the moon are made to light in order to reach the sun , and to the light which is right ; and what is just like a confirmation of what is right . and fear allah , that you may be al-muttaqun .
and among them are some who blame you in the matter of alms . if they are given from them , they are pleased , but if they are not given from it , they become angry .
inheriting me and inheriting the children of ya'qub ; and make him , my lord , acceptable !
they say , ‘ this is what has been revealed to you . ’ say , ‘ if i were to bring a clear word , then you will not be able to hear allah . then allah is the witness of what you do '
said he , 'what prevented thee to bow thyself , when i commanded thee ? ' said he , ' i am better than he ; thou createdst me of fire , and him thou createdst of clay . '
and when they hear what has been revealed to the messenger , you see their eyes overflowing with tears because of their recognition of the truth . they say , “ our lord , we have believed , so count us among the witnesses . ”
and do not think the people who are given the good things of allah and give the good news to them ; what is the matter with them ? indeed , what they used to do is true . and allah is all-aware of what you do .
who hath ordained laws . and granted guidance ,
indeed , he hadbeen among his people in happiness ;
and that it is he who causes death and gives life ;
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth and subjected the sun and the moon ? ' they will say , 'god . ' how then are they perverted ?
indeed , your lord is the best knower of two periods of the two part of the night or the night , or point on the part of the night . it is the difference of the night and the day . it is the tradition of god to make you the night and the day as a result of the law of the night . god is the most forgiving and the most merciful .
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they will say , 'the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . '
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
if you meet them in battle , treat them with those behind them so that they remember .
who know all that you do .
or is the unseen in their keeping , and so they are writing it down ?
then pharaoh withdrew , summoned up his guile , and then arrived .
ah , what will convey unto thee what the ascent is ! -
the dimwit oneamong us has been telling confused lies about god .
then magnify the name of thy lord , the all-mighty .
and among them is he who disputes in front of them , in fact there is no crookedness ; except the one who forbids the command , or is the one who holds things right , will be recompensed for a great reward .
no nation can outstrip its term nor can they lag behind .
verily those who disbelieve , and hinderfrom the path of allah , then die while they are disbelievers , allah will not forgive them .
he who desires the right path will be made to it . but he who has gone astray will be guided by his mercy . he who does not have any power to do so , will have no share in the least .
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
indeed the wasteful are brothers of the devils , and satan is ungrateful to his lord .
and whosoever harms after he has been harmed there is no blame upon them .
and of those whom we created there is a nation who guide with the truth and establish justice therewith .
and he who corrupts it is sure to fail .
and they say , “ if allah had willed to make the polytheists he would have taken us in his divinity , and we had not been forbidden ” ; so those who were before them , “ do so , with our forefathers , upon us , so that you may be just in the way . ”
we made the children of israel follow the children of israel , and provided them with good things , and provided them with good things . indeed , the word of your lord is the day of judgment .
again , death seized him , how was his determining !
he said : he says : a heifer not trained to till the soil or the fields ; sound and without blemish . they said : now hast thou brought the truth . so they said : now thou bringest the truth !
say : praise be to allah , and peace be on his slaves whom he hath chosen ! is allah better , or that which they associate ?
moses showed him the great miracle
there is no blame on you , if you have any knowledge about it , or have some guidance in case they have not received any knowledge . so , we too have given you a reminderfrom you . but this is just as the fact that you are doing .
so today the believers are laughing at the unbelievers ,
have they not travelled at the price of the end of those who were before them ? they were destroyed by the end of those who were before them . they were stronger in valour than allah ; and for them is one of the punished .
it is not for god to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing he only says to it , be , and it is .
indeed , those who have believed and done righteous deeds and humbled themselves to their lord - those are the companions of paradise , and there they shall live for ever .
they have not revered god properly . god is all-powerful and majestic .
the revelation of the book about which there is no doubt from the lord of the worlds .
and if this is in the scripture on the earth , you would not be obedient to the land , but it will be fixed , and the day on which the command will be cut open , and the command on that day will be made clear for the people of this book .
and it is he who has let free the two bodies of flowing water , one sweet and sweet , and the other salt and bitter , and he has set a barrier and a complete partition between them .
so verily , i swear by the planets that recede .
then celebrate the praise of your lord , and seek his forgiveness . he is the accepter of repentance .
and indeedmessengers were mocked at before you , but i granted respite to those who disbelieved , and then i seized them . then howwas my punishment !
verily we ! it is we who give life and cause death , and unto us is the journeying .
he it is who shapes you in the wombs as he will . there is no god but he , the mighty , the wise .
o people who believe ! fear allah , and be with the truthful .
in the alternation of night and day , and in all that god has created in the heavens and the earth , are signs for people who fear him .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
this is a right way , to show people . a part of that is a part of the reward for it . it is a fitting reward for the words of god . god is all-aware of everything .
say : ' o dear prophet , tell me the names of god . ' no word can be given to me . tell them , i have received the fact , but what has been revealed to me . is it not a source of warning for them ?
is there a sickness in their hearts , or are they in doubt ? or do they fear that god and his messenger will be unjust to them ? in fact , they themselves are unjust .
and we sent not down against his people after him a host from heaven , nor do we ever send .
your companion is neither astray , neither errs ,
and you will not , unlessthat allah wills , the lord of the 'alamin .
those who disbelieve , and hinder from the people of the sacred mosque which we have provided for them to all the nations , so that those who are bent on denying the truth will receive a punishment of ignominy . whoever disobeys god will have a painful punishment .
and in the hours before dawn , they wereaskingfor forgiveness ,
did he not find you orphaned and shelter you ?
and thus we try some of them by means of others , that they may say : are these they whom allah favoureth among us ? is not allah best aware of the thanksgivers ?
and before them , the people of noah , for it is they who weremore unjust and oppressing .
and be rewarded only according to your deeds .
but they turned away . so we let loose on them a flood from the dam and replaced their two gardens by two others bearing bitter fruits , tamarisks , and a few lote trees .
and when we said to the angels , “ bow down to adam. ” they bowed down , except for satan ; he refused .
we send not down the angels , save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
they can not listen to the exalted assemblyand are pelted from every side ,
and some faces on that day will be gloomy ,
so when our command came , we turnedupside down , and rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay , layer on layer ,
he said , ‘ my lord ! judgewith justice. ’ ‘ our lord is the all-beneficent , whose help is to be sought against what you describe . ’
we shall set up scales of justice on the day of resurrection , so that no soul will be wronged in the least , and if it be the weight of a mustard seed , we will bring it . and sufficient is we as reckoners .
it is he who sends down water from the sky , so that it is a source of wine for you to drink . this is the law of the truth , and the matter in which a clear law is for the people . this is how god presents the truth for the truth .
the night of destiny is better than a thousand months .
and when it is said to them : follow what allah has sent down , they say : nay , we shall follow that which we found our fathers following . what ! even if satan were calling them to the torment of the blaze ?
burn in its heat . it is all the same for you whether you exercise patience or not . you are only being requited for what you used to do .
in the heavens and the earth there is evidencefor the believers .
o children of adam ! take your adornment at every place of worship , and eat and drink and be not extravagant ; surely he does not love the extravagant .
those who love that indecency should spread among the believers , will have a painful punishment in this world and in the hereafter . god knows , and you do not know .
have they not considered the dominion of the heavens and the earth and all that allah has created and that it may be that their time has already drawn near ? so what discourse will they believe after this ?
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every nation , the unbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
who are submissive to god in their prayers ,
a little enjoyment , then their refuge is hell , and wretched is the resting place .
that was our argument which we gave to abraham against his people . we raise whom we will to an exalted rank . your lord is wise and knowing .
and when they see a sign they incite one another to scoff ,
they said , then bring him before the eyes of the people , that they may testify .
tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their private parts . that is purer for them . god is aware of what they do .
and thamood , sparing no one .
and a tongue , and two lips ?
while he was in the highest horizon .
but if you slip after clear arguments have come to you , then know that allah is mighty , wise .
accursed be the conjecturers
'who has done this to our gods ' they exclaimed . 'he must surely be a harmdoer '
and for the sake of your lord , be patient .
and he said : lo ! i am going unto my lord who will guide me .
the pharaoh said : ' o people , i have no part of that of which the name of god is . ' i have been commanded to say the words of god , be patient , and say to them , ' i have been commanded to speak with a new word . '
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and defame your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their oaths are nothing – so that they may desist .
there is none in the heavens and the earth but will come to the most merciful as a servant .
send the israelites with us .
and remember you much .
it is he who originates creation , then brings it back again , and it is easier for him . his is the loftiest description in the heavens and the earth . he is the almighty , the wise .
the thunder hymneth his praise and the angels for awe of him . he launcheth the thunderbolts and smiteth with them whom he will while they dispute about allah , and he is mighty in prowess .
have they not seen that allah , who created the heavens and the earth and was not wearied by their creation , is able to revive the dead ? yes , indeed he has power over all things .
and we had certainly given moses guidance , and we made the children of israel inherit the book .
but if they turn away , say : i have proclaimed to you all alike , and i do not know whether what you are promised is near or far .
unquestionably , the friends of allah will have no fear nor shall they grieve .
and in their footsteps , we sent jesus son of mary , fulfilling the torah that preceded him , and we gave him the gospel , confirming what is before it , and scriptures , and a guidance and a reminder to the godfearing .
o my father ! verily there hath come unto me of knowledge that which hath not come unto thee ; so follow me , and i will guide thee on a right path .
as for those who are wary of their lord , for them will be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever , a hospitality from god ; that which is with god is better for the pious .
say : 'allah alone has the conclusive proof . had he willed , he would have guided you all '
and never came there unto them a messenger but they did mock him .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
and when those who disbelieve see you , they take you not except for mockery , saying : is this the one who talks of your gods ? and they are disbelievers in the remembrance of the beneficent allah .
and none denies it except every sinful transgressor .
by the book that makes things clear , -
it is he who breaks the dawn , and made the night for rest , and the sun and the moon for reckoning . such is the design of the all-mighty , the all-knowing .
when their messengers came to them from before them and behind them , saying , do not worship any one but god . they said , if our lord had pleased he would have sent down angels . we are indeed going to believe in your message .
if they accuse you of falsehood , the people of noah , 'ad and thamud had accusedbefore ,
so we saved him and his family , except his wife ; we destined her to be of those who remained behind .
and he made it a word enduring among his posterity , that they may turn back .
they said : we miss the king 's cup ; and for him who bringeth it shall be a camel-load ; and thereof i am a guarantor .
or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that allah will not expose their spite ?
you have no concern in the affair whether he turns towards them or punishes them . they are harmdoers .
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
those who were arrogant said , “ we reject what you believe in . ”
and noah , when he called before . so we answered him , and delivered him and his family from the great calamity .
and also our forefathers ?
nor am i worshiping what you have worshipped ,
and those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith - we shall join their descendants with them , and we shall not diminish unto them aught of their work . every man is for what he hath earned .
so pray to your lord , and sacrifice .
lord of the east and lord of the west .
the word of god is set upon you in the day , satan will not have any sin on account of the devil . and whoever fears god , then you will be brought back to him .
no associate has he . and this i have been commanded , and i am the first of the muslims .
the one who was freed from the faith , the one telling him to himself . he said , “ do not be with me ; my lord is the one who will not be successful . my lord is the best of the successful . ”
he said : o musa ! i have chosen thee above mankind by my messages and by my speaking . so hold that which i have given thee , and be of the thankful .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah , or denies the truth when it comes to him ? is there not a home in hell for the disbelievers ?
there is none among the people of the book but will believe in him before his death , and on the day of resurrection he will be a witness against them .
the people of noah deniedbefore them . they belied our messenger saying , he is mad ! he was rebuffed ,
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
o you who believe ! be conscious of your own selves . some of you are straightforward . there is a mention of the truth , in which one of you is true , so do not dispute with one another . do you look forward to any other claim in the case of your lord ? god will surely be watchful .
it is not for god to take a son . glory be to him ! when he decrees a thing he only says to it , be , and it is .
gardens of eden , whereof the gates are opened for them ,
so we caused the earth to swallow him and his dwelling-place . then he had no host to help him against allah , nor was he of those who can save themselves .
have you not seen how your lord lengthens out the shadow ? had he willed , he could have made it still . then we made the sun its pilot ;
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
but they who do not desire to make a breach with allah , and they ascribe a lie to it , and ascribe a lie to them . indeed , it is the hereafter that they are going to be thrown into hell , and they will be thrown into hell .
and said : o our father ! we went racing with one another and left joseph behind with our things , and the wolf ate him . but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
indeed , he has broughtthe truth , and confirmed theapostles .
say : this is my way : i call to allah with sure knowledge , i and whoever follows me . glory be to allah ! and i am not of the idolaters .
but as for him who is given his book behind his back ,
but when he came to it , he was called : blessed is whosoever is in the fire and whosoever is around it . and glorified be allah , the lord of the worlds .
say , i have been forbidden to worship those whom you worship besides god when clear arguments have come to me from my lord , and i have been commanded to submit to the lord of the universe .
and do not say about what your tongues assert of untruth , this is lawful , and this is unlawful , in order to impute lies to god . those who invent lies against god will never prosper .
he sends down the angels with the spirit by his command upon whom he wills of his servants , : warn mankind that there is no god but i , so fear me .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
he said : disguise her throne for her that we may see whether she will go aright or be of those not guided .
then we gave moses the book , complete for him who does good , and explaining all things in detail , and a guidance and a mercy , that they might believe in the meeting with their lord .
and those who guard their private parts
some enjoyment in this world ; then to us shall be their return , then we shall make them taste the severe punishment because they used to disbelieve .
and who , i hope , will forgive me my faults on the day of recompense .
and we sent noah to his people , and he said : o my people ! worship allah ! ye have no other god but him . will ye not ward off ?
every soul will taste death . then to us you will be returned .
your lord is the originator of the heavens and the earth , then the throne of the throne and the throne will be concluded . the sun and the moon will be called out by god 's command . the words of god will be the supreme .
and if you call them to guidance they do not hear ; and you see them looking towards you , yet they do not see .
and our duty is but plain conveyance .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
but those who deny and scorn our revelations shall be the inmates of hell , where they will remain forever .
near which is the garden of repose .
but as for him who believeth and doeth right , he shall have a goodly reward , and we shall speak unto him a mild command .
and on them , and on the ships , you are transported .
that it is he who causes laughter and weeping .
nor canst thou lead the blind out of their error . thou canst make none to hear save those who believe in our revelations and who have surrendered themselves .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
then he made his progeny from an extract of a humble fluid .
and the word of allah has proved true to them , and they say : are these the ones who have been given charge of them ? we have been content with them , and we made them a thing , and allah 's command is that which they fabricate .
we recite to you some of the news of musaand fir'aunin truth , for a people who believe .
they have misled many , and do not increase the wrongdoers in anything but error . ”
all this . but the transgressors will have a miserable return .
and uphold my name with posterity ,
say , ‘ who is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth ? ’ say , ‘ allah. ’ say , ‘ allah alone has full mercy upon me , and i will not be among the losers . ’
the one who was freed and remembered after a time said , i will inform you of its interpretation , so send me forth .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
the story of among the people of the present book is a narration . the tongue of the book is revealed to them . the words of god is true . the words of god is true . they say : god has the knowledge of the unseen .
and from which the cautious shall be distanced .
and mention in the book mary , when she withdrew from her people to an eastern place ;
'adbelied the messengers .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
the day when they will hear the shout in all truth . that is the day of coming forth .
but those who have been given the knowledge of the book , and believe in what you have been sent down , and believe in what you have been sent down , will have the faith in you , and those who are constant in their prayers .
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of his ?
and as for the favor of your lord , report .
it is not for the prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the polytheists , even though they be near relatives , after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of hell .
the unbelievers say , ‘ this is nothing but a lie that he has fabricated , and others have helped him at it. ’ so they have committed injustice and falsehood .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
and what shall teach thee what is the pit ?
and shown him the two ways ?
and if you are killed in the way of allah or die , then surely forgiveness from allah and mercy are better than all what they amass .
allah the immanently indispensable .
and indeed your lord – only he is the almighty , the most merciful .
as for those who are wary of their lord , for them will be gardens underneath which rivers flow , therein dwelling forever , a hospitality from god ; that which is with god is better for the pious .
but those for whom the goodfrom us has gone before , will be far removed from it .
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
and those who believe and do righteous deeds - we will surely admit them among the righteous .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
he said , “ you and your parents are in evident error . ”
and they besought judgment , and disappointed was every tyrant obstinate .
inscribed on a well-guarded tablet .
that . and whoever honors the symbols of allah - indeed , it is from the piety of hearts .
were we then weary with the first creation ? yet they are in doubt about a new creation .
but the wretched will turn away from it .
those will be awarded the chamber for their patience , and they will be received therein with greetings andpeace .
allah has made the light light of the heavens and the earth , and the shadows of the light are as the light of the darkness . it is the like of a smoking , in which there is a smoking for the eye . it is the difference of a smoking , and allah has the knowledge of the qur'an .
there are degreeswith allah , and allah is seer of what they do .
how will it be when the angels draw out their souls striking their faces and their backs ?
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
all that is in the heavens and the earth sings the praises of god . he is all-mighty and all-wise .
they set apart for what they do not know a portion of that which we have provided them . by allah , you will surely be questioned about what you used to fabricate .
on that daytidings will be dimmed for them , nor will they ask one of another ,
if any of the boys were arrogant , he is not a servant of his own ; but if they are a righteous , it is only for a good deed ; and if they are righteous , it is only a few that will be righteous .
he is naught but a man bedevilled ; so wait on him for a time .
and he revealed to his servant what he revealed .
they said , “ woe to us – we were indeed rebellious . ”
he will forgive you your sins and admit you into gardens with streams running in them , to lodge in the gardens of eden . that is the supreme success .
ta-seen-meem .
so they could neither scale it , nor could they pierce it .
gardens of eden they shall enter ; therein they shall be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls , and their apparel therein shall be of silk .
abraham was neither a jew nor a christian ; but he was a muslim , a muslim , and he was not of the idolaters .
and we made the son of mary and his mother a sign , and sheltered them in a level highland with flowing water .
among the people are some who are bent on denying the truth , and reject the path of god . what is revealed to him is the word of god . it is they who are the people of understanding .
when the savage beasts shall be brought together ,
exalted in rank , lord of the throne : he directs the inspiration by his command to any of his servants he pleases , that he may warnof the day of encounter .
we send not down the angels , save with truth , and then they would not be respited .
o ye who believe ! if ye fear allah , he will give you a criterion , and will expiate for you your misdeeds , and forgive you , and allah is the owner of mighty grace .
oh , woe to me ! i wish i never took so-and-so for a friend .
we sent forth noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them were rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
because he has wealth and sons .
does he think that no one will ever have power over him ?
say , he is the beneficent one in whom we have faith and trust . you will soon know who is in evident error .
even as we have sent among you a messenger of your own , reciting to you our verses and purifying you and teaching you the book and wisdom , and teaching you that which you did not know .
whatever mercy allah unfolds for the people , none can withhold it ; and whatever he withholds none can release after him . he is the almighty , the wise .
then lo ! this day theyare sharers in the doom .
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and of men and beasts and cattle there are likewise diverse hues . only those of his bondmen who have knowledge fear allah alone . indeed , allah is exalted in might and forgiving .
and he drew forth his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
he gives life and causes death , and to him you will be returned .
say , “ o people given the book ! what is the matter with you , that you may be the source of faith ? ” that is what we have revealed , “ what is revealed to us , except that we have been muslims . ”
they glorify him night and day without tiring .
when the earth is shaken with its quake .
a revelation from the lord of the worlds .
verily we ! it is we who have revealed the admonition , and verily we are the guardians thereof .
and we caused to grow over him a gourd vine .
then they will be pitched into it , they and the perverse
this is the result of your deeds . god is not unjust to his servants .
o ye who believe ! betray not allah and his messenger , nor knowingly betray your trusts .
and hell is there for all to see ,
say : the appointment to you is for a day , which you can not put back for an hournor put forward .
are they waiting except for the hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware ?
there is no sin in the case of any of the people who are in the matter equal to it , if he does not want the burden of any thing , nor can it be in accordance with the burden of their bad deeds . they will be brought back to the right path , and to god who will be purified .
then , , the word is not open to you , so that you may give the life of this book to the right way , and do not follow the tradition of what you have been permitted , except for the cause of god . in that case , you will not be able to receive the like of it . what is the matter with god , for those who have been given the lie to god . this is the law of god .
so that there may not be for him a pair of the two sun , so that the two sun may come upon it . and whoever does not give the day of resurrection , let it be in the hearts of the day of resurrection , and that it is in the same way for those who are certainin pain .
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , even though the unbelievers may detest .
and obey thou not the infidels and the hypocrites , and heed not their annoyances , and trust in allah ; and allah sufficeth as a trustee .
those who do not believe in the signs of god , god will not guide , and for them is a painful punishment .
and landmarksand by the stars , theyguide themselves .
ta sin . these are verses from the quran , a book that makes things clear ;
these are the verses of allah . we recite them to you in truth , and indeed , you are one of the messengers .
indeed , the lord of the heavens and the earth is the one who created the throne and then the throne of the lord of the throne . it is he who is the lord of all things . so will you not take heed ?
when you recite the quran , we place a hidden barrier between you and those who do not believe in the hereafter ,
say thou : thou art a wizard open ; we speak the word of the people on the heights ; so the word shall be in the heaven , if it be the word of these people .
and of them is he who believeth therein , and of them is he who believeth not therein , and thy lord is best aware of the corrupters .
o you who have faith ! take care of your own souls . he who strays can not harm you if you are guided . to allah will return all that you have done .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ? -
indeed the ledger of the wicked will be insijjin .
or , that they may follow the talk in respect of his speech , in fact , to please him ; but if the matter is decided , so decide only with the commands of allah . indeed , it is a painful punishment .
are they looking except for the hour to overtake them suddenly ? its tokens have already come . but how will they be reminded when it has come to them ?
men whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of allah and the maintenance of prayer and the giving of poor-rate ; they fear a day in which the hearts and eyes shall be transformed ,
so do not obey the disbelievers , but strive against them with the qur'an a great striving .
and do not be weak in pursuit of the enemy ; if you are suffering , they are indeed suffering as you are suffering , but you expect from allah that which they do not hope ; and allah is knowing , wise .
and certainly they had made a covenant with allah before , that they would not turn their backs ; and covenants with allah shall be questioned .
suchjesus the son of mary , a statement of truth , about which they doubt .
instead of allah ? can they help you or help themselves ?
and when the good befalleth them , then is it to be judged , and they said : our father ! we have been preaching unto them , so that the affair is of no profit to us . it is the right course . it is a command .
for the companions of the right hand .
and we rained down on them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
your lord is the almighty , the merciful .
god is my lord and your lord , so worship him . that is the straight path .
and that he destroyed the formera'ad ,
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
but those who defy our revelations—these are the people of misery .
that was because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
nor did the people of the book disagreed among themselves until after receiving the ancient divine testaments .
whatever thing you have been doing , the words of god is true , and remember god 's blessing , and the blessing that he has bestowed upon you . remember , this is the law of god , so that he may make you clear to the differences , so that god may make clear to you his revelations , so that god may make clear to you his revelations .
untouched before them by any man or jinn --
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
so bring our fathers , if you are truthful .
or have they a god other than allah ? exaltations to allah above that which they associate !
have you not seen those who fear of death , while they have no one to be of any benefit to them ? god said , you have been given to life . god is possessor of exceeding bounty .
they said : glory be to thee ! we have no knowledge save that which thou hast taught us . lo ! thou , only thou , art the knower , the wise .
and allah propoundeth for two men the similitude of a party of them , a place of similitude : for any of them there is a duty unto thee ; so is he unto whom belongeth a message like unto him ? so shall he be admonished , - that he may be ?
most surely the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
they solemnly swear that if a warner came to them , they would be more rightly guided than any other nation . but when a warner came to them , it only increased their aversion .
and if ye would count the favours of allah ye could not compute them verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none except the most gracious holds them up . surely he sees everything .
and they make the jinn associates with allah , while he created them ; and they attribute to him sons and daughters , without any knowledge . glory be to him ! high be he exalted above what they describe !
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt and these rivers that flow at my feet ? do you not see ?
do you not see those who befriend a people with whom allah is wroth ? they are neither of you nor of them , and they swear to a lie while they know .
in houses , which allah has ordered to be raised , and his name is mentioned in them ; exalting him in the mornings and the evenings ,
so be patient , with a sweet patience .
your religion is but one religion , and i am your lord , therefore fear me .
by god 's benevolence and his grace . god is all-knowing and all-wise .
said he , 'then go thou forth hence ; thou art accursed .
is it a falsehood-god beside allah - that ye desire ?
o you who believe ! do not say raina and say unzurna and listen , and for the disbelievers is a painful punishment .
from replacing you with others or raising you in a way you do not know .
and all that we relate unto thee of the story of the messengers is that whereby we strengthen thy heart ; and in this there hath come to thee the truth and an exhortation and a reminder unto the believers .
o prophet ! fear god , and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites ; surely god is all-knowing , all-wise .
that is for what your hands have put forth and because allah is not ever unjust toservants .
and yet they worship besides allah that which can neither benefit them nor harm them , and the disbeliever is ever an abettor against his lord .
the messiah does not disdain to be a servant of allah , nor do the angels who are near . whoever disdains his worship and is arrogant , he will gather them all to him .
he said : they are following in my footsteps , and i hastened to you , my lord , that thou mightest be pleased .
o believers , advance not before god and his messenger , and fear god . god is all-hearing , all-knowing .
you pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world . but who will plead for them with allah on the day of resurrection , or who will be their pleader ?
and why did you not , when you heard it , say , ‘ it is not for us to utter such a thing.you are immaculate ! this is a monstrous slander ! ’
he said : we will strengthen your arm with your brother , and we will give you both power , so that they will not touch you . with our signs , you and those who follow you will be the victors .
and if every soul that has done wrong had all that is on the earth , it would offer it for its ransom . and secretly they will feel regret when they see the punishment , and the matter is justly decided between them , and they are not wronged .
and ina'adwhen we sent the fatal wind against them .
if you have any plans , use them .
woe to every slanderer backbiter .
a cup from a spring being passed round to them ,
thus does allah clarify his signs to you so that you may exercise your reason .
surely the day of decision isappointed :
we sent a shower of stones upon them , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
o ye who believe ! be not as those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said ; and he was high in the sight of allah .
o prophet ! say to your wives : if you desire the life of this world and its glitter , then come , i will provide for you and release you in a graceful manner .
he said , no blameon you this day . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
and when you killed a living soul , and disputed thereon -- and allah was to bring forth what you were hiding .
and verily it is , in the mother of the book , in our presence , exalted , full of wisdom .
verily ! you are of us ever a well-seer .
'adbelied the messengers .
and when we heard the guidance , we believed in it . and whoever believes in his lord fears neither loss nor oppression .
this is the day of decision , we have assembled you and the ancients .
they shall have what they wish with their lord . that is the reward of the doers of good .
say , “ shall we inform you of the greatest losers in their works ? ”
he said , no blameon you this day . may allah forgive you , and he is the most merciful of those who show mercy .
“ this is a crowd rushing headlong with you. ” there is no welcome for them . they will roast in the fire .
he then sneaked upon their deities and said , “ do you not eat ? ”
all the time of allah . then , the people who are arrogant , are not the ones who are arrogant . they will not be able to speak to the right way , but will be told , if only allah could show us the way . so will we be rightly guided .
and those who disbelieve say , why has the quran not been revealed to him all at once ? thus , that we may strengthen your heart thereby , and we have spaced it distinctly .
so we destroyed men stronger in valour than they , and the example of the ancients passed away .
save those who afterward repent and make amends.lo ! allah is forgiving , merciful .
roasting at a scorching fire ,
or you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces , as you have claimed , or as you have averred .
when he said to his father : o my father ! why do you worship that which can neither hear nor see nor benefit you in any way ?
and allah 's account is the parable of their deeds , and of every provision is the provision of allah ; and allah 's provision for them is the favour of allah , and so he shall inform them of what they used to do .
does he not know that allah sees ?
we had certainly tried those who were before them , and allah will surely know those who are truthful , and he will surely know the liars .
it will come upon them suddenly , dumbfounding them . they will not be able to repel it , nor will they be reprieved .
god has the right of his good deeds . do away with what they have done . this is the result of their deeds . god does not love the evil-doers .
and none hath with him any favour for reward ,
and it is he who has made the plots of them a pair of wealth , and so the wiles of those who go forth , and their return will come to pass , and with their lord , he said , ‘ did i not tell you , ‘ what you are not ’ ? ’
with the help of allah . he succoureth whomsoever he will , and he is the mighty , the merciful .
tell them : you turn to stones or iron ,
and a cup overflowing .
but when we lifted the torment from them , they immediately broke their promise .
and by the night when it darkens ,
say : allah delivers you from them and from every distress , but again you ascribe partners .
if only there had been a communitythat believed and profited by its faith . but , when they believed , we removed from them the torment of disgrace in the life of the world and gave them comfort for a while .
on her neck shall be a cord of twisted fibre .
and know that he has made known to you all that is in your hands , but allah has believed in him . so he has prepared for you a way , so that the disbelievers might be made manifest .
and let not those who disbelieve think that they can outstrip . lo ! they can not escape .
that was because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth , and because you used to behave insolently .
he said : it was she who sought to seduce me . and one of her household testified : if his shirt is torn from the front , then she speaketh the truth , and he is a liar .
whether we show you some of what we have promised them or cause you to die , your duty is only to conveyand on us is the reckoning .
god wants to make it clear to you and guide you in the ways of those before you , and to turn towards you ; god is all-knowing , all-wise .
and you dwelt in the dwellings of those who wronged themselves , and it was clear to you how we dealt with them , and we have madeexamples to you .
said , then what is the case of the former generations ?
it scorches the flesh .
and on the day when he will call them and say : where are those whom you deemed to be my associates ?
he it is who sent his messenger with the guidance and the true religion , that he may make it prevail over all religions . and sufficient is allah as a witness .
these are they upon whose hearts and hearing and sight allah hath sealed . and such are the heedless .
and when they defiedwhat they were forbidden from , we said to them : beapes , despised and hated .
those against whom the word has become due will say : our lord ! these are they whom we led astray , so we led them astray as we ourselves were astray . we declare our innocencebefore you . it was not us that they worshipped .
do those who devise evil plots feel secure that god will not cause the earth to swallow them , or that the punishment will not come upon them from where they do not know ?
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of his ?
and those who are watchful of their prayers .
they said , 'our lord knows we are envoys unto you ;
behold , the hearts of those who are in their hearts will take heed , or on account of the truth . there is no doubt that they may be able to receive a lesson from allah . in order that they may be reminded .
even if we sent down the angels to them , and the dead spoke to them , and we gathered together all things before their very eyes , they would not believe , unless allah willed , but most of them are ignorant .
except those of the right hand
so when they angered us , we punished them , and drowned them all .
are your unbelievers better than those ? or have you been given immunity in the scriptures ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
alas for the servants ! no messenger ever came to them , but they ridiculed him .
and i do not ask you for it any payment . my payment is only from the lord of the worlds .
so set out with your family in a part of the night and walk behind them , and let none of you look back , and go forth where you are commanded .
we gave luqman wisdom , saying : give thanks to allah . whosoever is grateful , is grateful for his own good . and whosoever is ungrateful , then surely allah is self-sufficient , praiseworthy .
to god belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . he forgives or punishes whomever he wants . god is all-forgiving and all-merciful .
o abraham ! forsake this . lo ! thy lord 's commandment hath gone forth , and verily there cometh unto them a torment unavoidable .
they ask you about the spirit . say , the spirit is by the command of my lord , and you have been given only a little knowledge .
then look again and yet again , your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted .
and the dwellers on the battlements will call to certain men whom they recognize by their marks , ‘ your rallying did not avail you , nor what you used to disdain .
and thus did the word of your lord prove true against those who disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire .
he said : nay , cast ye down . then lo ! their cords and their staves were made to appear to him by their magic as though they were running .
i have chosen you for my service .
and recall what time we delivered you from the folk of fir'awn who were visiting you with evil torment , slaying your sons and letting your women live ; and therein was a tremendous trial from your lord .
indeed the ledger of the wicked will be insijjin .
or to a needy person in misery ;
and if thou askest them , 'who created the heavens and the earth ? ' they will say , 'the all-mighty , the all-knowing created them . '
to him belongs all that dwells in the night and the day . he is all-hearing and all-knowing .
for such there will be alloted a share for what they have earned ; and allah is swift at settling accounts .
the reverent will remember .
and they denied our signs utterly .
the book has come to you of the book , when it has been revealed to you , ‘ when you recite the truth , allah ’ s precedent is with the people of this book , and indeed allah will bring forth the faithless as the faithless . ’
who have divided themselves into various religious sects , each one happy with their own belief .
but they rejected him , so the earthquake seized them , and they were left motionless in their homes .
surely your lord will judge between them on the day of resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ .
we had supposed that men and jinn would never utter a lie against god .
except his wife . we have decreed that she will be among those who remain behind .
i do not exculpate myself . lo ! thesoul enjoineth unto evil , save that whereon my lord hath mercy . lo ! my lord is forgiving , merciful .
we made it a reminder and a provision for the needy .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
and to you is the true word ; and if you be shown the truth , it is only for you to have a right path ; so when the promise of the promise is to come , it is only to you that the believers are at the like of the first time ; then , let the believers deny it .
do you not see that allah sends down water from the sky , then we produce therewith fruits of divers hues ? and in the mountains are streaks white and red , of diverse hues , and pitchy black .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
the people of the book are the ones who have received the book . it has been revealed to you what has been revealed to you . they are the people of the whole book . say , i am commanded to worship god and to him you will all return .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who slandered moses , but allah cleared him of what they said ; and he was high in the sight of allah .
the heavens are unveiled ,
and that you worshipme ? this is a straight path .
do they not see the earth , how many of every noble kind we have caused to grow in it ?
those who cameafter them say : our lord ! forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in the faith , and put not in our hearts any hatred against those who believe . lord , you are indeed compassionate and merciful .
but the shout seized them in the morning ,
remember when you left your home in the morning , to assign battle-positions for the believers . god is all-hearing and all-knowing .
say , ‘ spend willingly or unwillingly , it will never be accepted from you ; indeed you are a transgressing lot . ’
and thus did we show abraham the realm of the heavens and the earth , that he might be of those who are sure .
so whither do you stray ?
when the truth came to them from us , they said , ‘ your immaculate omens are with us , but they did not have any faith in what you had been commanded , ’ ‘ indeed we are not going to be there . ’ ‘ ‘ indeed we are not its guardians . ’
he is the one who accepts the faithless from among the people of the book and the laws of the book , so that it is in the first manner . and they did not tell you about the first time , so it is in the case of allah that they may be guided .
a mercy from your lord . verily ! he is the all-hearer , the all-knower .
we narrate to you the best of narratives in revealing this quran to you , even though you were unaware before it .
a word is revealed to you in the way of god , so that he may make it clear to you , or in order to make it clear . they are the words of god , and they will have no power to escape .
they said , “ these two are magicians , who want to expel you from your land by their magic , and to abolish your exemplary way of life .
and when it is said to them , “ spend out of what god has provided for you , ” those who disbelieve say to those who believe , “ shall we feed someone whom god could feed , if he willed ? you are in clear error . ”
they said , 'salih , thou hast hitherto been a source of hope among us . what , dost thou forbid us to serve what our fathers worshipped ? ' we are suspicious of what thou callest us to .
and whosoever striveth , striveth only for himself . lo ! allah is altogether independent ofcreatures .
how shall allah guide a people who disbelieved after their belief and after they bore witness that the messenger is true , and after clear signs had come to them ? and allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot .
see what similes they strike for thee : but they have gone astray , and can not find a way .
say thou : the holy spirit hath brought it down from thy lord with truth , that it may establish those who believe , and as a guidance and glad tidings unto the muslims .
no soul can believe except by allah ’ s leave , and he lays defilement upon those who do not exercise their reason .
we gave moses the book , and appointed his brother aaron as his assistant .
tell the unbelievers that if they desist , their past will be forgiven them ; but if they persist , the fate of the men of old has already passed .
and we did not give any any share of the punishment of his men , but it was a snake , and we sent it upon him from whom we had sent it , and we made it a herald of the hidden , and it was revealed , and it was revealed . and allah did not oppress them .
we have put yokes round their necks right up to their chins , so that their heads are forced up .
and it is he who created the heavens and the earth , and in the morning the dominion of the heavens and the earth ; and he knows what is before her , and what is behind it . and he knows what you do , and what you are set on .
but if justice is on their side , they come compliantly to him .
and out of our mercy we gave him his brother aaron , a prophet .
and this is the garden which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do .
and take for yourselves palaces and fortresses that you might abide eternally ?
those who prefer the life of this world more than the hereafter , who bar from the way of allah and seek to make it crooked . they are in extreme error .
verily , al-abrarwill be in delight .
then woe that day unto those that cry lies ,
the well-to-do and the rich among you should not stop the relatives or the destitute and the destitute . let not the property of allah be going to forgive you . allah is forgiving , the most merciful .
and that he might cut off a part of those who disbelieve , or overwhelm them so that they retire , frustrated .
the hour is coming , no doubt of it , but most people do not believe .
and every time i called them so that you might forgive them , they put their fingers in their ears , covered themselves up with their garments , and persisted , and waxed very proud .
and if you come to the book , and to those who follow the truth , then follow the truth , and follow not the truth , and follow not the truth after it ; and indeed , you would be of the zalimun .
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
when he came to his lord with a pure heart .
it is he who has made the earth for you as a dwelling , and made for you the like of it . it is the like of the heavens and the earth . it is the same for you , so that you may worship god alone .
and if you punish , then punish with the like of that with which you were afflicted . but if you are patient , it is better for the patient .
and it was said : enter the word of mine . so she went astray , and he said : my lord ! lo ! i have taken a thing with the lord of the worlds . so he said : my lord ! verily i have been so of the lord of the worlds .
a resort for the rebellious ,
whoever expects to encounter allahallah ’ stime will surely come , and he is the all-hearing , the all-knowing .
to us they will all return .
seest thou one who denies the judgment ?
and verily , llyas was one of the sent ones .
on the day of judgment , if you were to be one of the misguided , the in order to recite the word in order to recite the word of this book , but the same is to the poor , if only you knew it .
and the secrets of the hearts exposed ,
and do not corrupt the earth after it has been set in order , and pray to him with fear and hope ; indeed allah ’ s mercy is close to the virtuous .
as such the harmdoers were annihilated . praise be to allah , lord of the worlds !
do you lust after men instead of women ? you are indeed a stolid people .
and they will ask you about the sun and the moon , and say , “ keep and wait for the sustenance of allah ” ; and they are in regard to allah ’ s rope , and he will inform them of what they have been doing ; and they will be made to remain in the way – it is they who will remain in the end .
we have sent down revelations clearly showing the truth . god guides whom he wills to a straight path .
nay ! those who disbelieve are ingiving the lie to the truth .
do you then wonder at this discourse ,
unquestionably , it is they who are the corrupters , but they are not aware .
we brought you the truth , but most of you hate the truth .
your striving is indeed to different ends !
these , they said , are only a small band ,
the wealth of the everlasting life is a thing of the everlasting life , and do not be just with the worldly life . do not be like the custom of god 's servants . god does not love the unjust people .
thus do we make it traverse the hearts of the guilty :
he who created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them in six days , then settled on the throne . the beneficent ! ask him as he is al-khabir .
we and our fathers were promised this before.these are nothing but tales of the ancients . ’
verily those who disbelieve , and die while they are infidels , these it is on whom shall be the curse of allah and of angles and of men combined .
and say to the young men , let their eyes have come to nothing but what they have been doing to go on , but to their own parents , and to their fathers , and their son . or their fathers or their brothers , as to their fathers , the son of mary . or , their son , or their fathers , the son of mary . they will be in the presence of god , the male and the female .
and abundant spoils that they will capture . and allah is ever mighty , wise .
some of them look to you . but can you guide the blind even if they do not see ?
and it is he who gives life and causes death , and his is the alternation of night and day . will you not then understand ?
mary , be obedient to your lord , prostrate and bow with those who bow '
they said : nay , but we bring thee that concerning which they keep disputing .
nay , but that day they shall submit ;
verily this is for you by way of recompense , and your endeavour hath been accepted .
but the factions differed among themselves . so woe to the wrongdoers for the punishment of a painful day .
or who is it that will be a host for you to help you , other than the beneficent ? the disbelievers are in nothing but delusion .
he said : my lord ! give me then respite till the day theare raised .
they swear by allah that they belong to you , but they are not of you . but they are a people who are afraid .
the unbelievers say , 'thou art not a messenger . ' say : 'god suffices as a witness between me and you , and whosoever possesses knowledge of the book . '
and we send the winds fertilizing , then we send down water from the sky and given you drink from it , and you are not its treasurers .
and that it is he who is the lord of sirius .
not a sign of their lord comes to them , but they turn away from it .
we used to sit in its positions to eavesdrop , but anyone listening now finds a flame waiting for him .
none shall enter it but the most wretched ,
we used to supplicate him aforetime . surely he is the all-benign , the all-compassionate . '
we shall show them our signs in the universe and in their own souls until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth . is it not sufficient that your lord is a witness over all things ?
such is the knower of the invisible and the visible , the mighty , the merciful ,
we hasten unto them with good things ? nay , but they perceive not .
and he is allah ; there is no allah save him . his is the praise in the former and in the latter . his is the command , and unto him ye will be returned .
neither your blood relations nor your children will be of any avail to you on the day of resurrection . he will judge between you , and allah sees what you do .
have they not seen the birds above them spreading and closing their wings ? none except the most gracious holds them up . surely he sees everything .
indeed , that which is in respect of allah is no other than allah . what is the matter with you , other than allah . indeed , that which you have been seeking to worship besides allah are the sustenance of you . so to him you will be returned .
and those who are fearful of their lord 's doom -
, we have revealed the quran to you in gradual steps .
then he frowned and scowled ,
o children of israel , remember my favor which i have bestowed upon you and fulfill my covenantthat i will fulfill your covenant , and fear me alone .
they prefer to be with those who stay behind , and their hearts were sealed , so they do not understand .
and whenever a chapter is sent down , some of them say , “ which of you has this increased in faith ? ” as for those who believe , it increases them in faith , and they rejoice .
god alternates the night and the day . in this there is a lesson for those who have eyes .
fight them . god will punish them by your hands and disgrace them and give you victory over them and heal the hearts of a believing people .
we gave moses the book , but differences arose about it . had it not been for a word that had already gone forth from your lord , the matter would have been decided between them ; and they are in grave doubt concerning it .
then the blast overtook them justly , and we made them as rubbish of dead leaves . so away with the people who do wrong !
one vigorous ; and he grew clear to view
when the quran is recited , listen to it and pay attention , so that you may receive mercy .
i am a trustworthy messengers sent to you .
so observe how was the outcome of their plan : we destroyed them and their people , all .
and they say : why was not this quran sent down to some great man from the two cities ?
they ask you about the story of a dispute . tell them : why is it that you are responsible for the people of the remembrance ? it will be said to the believers , this is what you are trying to worship . have fear of god so that perhaps you will have everlasting happiness .
those who have been entrusted to you can say , “ we were not going to be able to say , “ we were not going to be able to say from allah – and if the disbelievers disbelieve , they will say , ‘ are we not going to destroy you ? ’ and then allah will inform those who deny the truth . ”
and when the femaleburied aliveshall be questioned .
put your hand into your pocket , and it will come forth white without evil , among nine signs to pharaoh and his people . they are indeed a wicked people . ”
that allah may reward them according to the best of their deeds , and give them more out of his grace : for allah doth provide for whom he will without measure .
who is it that will lend allah a goodly loan , so he will multiply it for him and he will havea liberal reward ?
the chiefs among his people who were faithless said , ‘ if you follow shu'ayb , you will indeed be losers . ’
and do not be inspired in the truth , except that you follow the religion of allah , and say , ‘ indeed it is the guidance of allah , and say , ‘ it is only the guidance of allah . ’ say , ‘ indeed , it is the guidance of allah , and in order that he may unite those who are grateful . ’
washing it down with boiling water .
then i will come upon them from before them and from behind them and from their right and from their left , and you will not find most of them thankful .
and when the angels said , 'mary , god has chosen thee , and purified thee ; he has chosen thee above all women .
and they said , “ do not abandon your gods , and do not abandon wadda or suwa – or yaghuth or yauq or nasr . ”
and lower to them the wing of humbleness out of mercy and say , “ my lord , have mercy on them , as they raised me up when i was little . ”
the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is sickness said , “ their religion has deluded these people. ” but whoever puts his trust in god—god is mighty and wise .
tell my servants , to say what is best . satan sows discord among them . satan is to man an open enemy .
perhaps god will forgive them ; he is all-merciful and all-forgiving .
and whoever does not respond to allah ’ s summoner , he can not frustrate him in the earth , and he has no protectors besides him . those are in manifest error .
we sent a shower of stones upon them , except the family of lot , whom we saved at dawn
the hour is coming , no doubt of it , but most people do not believe .
o mankind ! worship your lord , who created you and those who were before you , so that you may be godwary .
by the heaven , and at-tariq ;
and the believers , men and women , and they are allies of one another , and enjoin the prayer and the poor-rate and establish prayer and give zakah ; and allah is most mighty , most wise .
they say : 'what , are we being restored as we were before ,
say thou : i have no power of revelation that i have been revealed unto me , nor is it unto him who hath been delivered unto him . he who is a defrauder , will not be able to say , it is only the word of a soothsayer , or a whisper . lo ! thy lord is ever forgiving , the lord of mercy .
o believers , respond to god and the messenger when he calls you to that which will give you life . know that god stands between a man and his heart , and that to him you will be gathered .
the shades of paradise will bend over them , and low will hang the clusters of grapes .
those who believe say : if a chapter is sent down , then when a categorical surah is revealed that mentions war , you should see those in whose hearts is sickness looking at you like one who swoons at death .
in a lofty garden ,
satan frightens you of poverty and prompts you toindecent acts . but allah promises you forgiveness from himself and bounty , and allah is all-bounteous , all-knowing .
say : 'what think you ? if what is revealed to you is the truth from the book of god . what is the matter with you , if it is the book of the psalms ? god is the right-guided .
for your lord will have commanded it .
so he went before his brother , before the brothers of his absence . then he received the story of his brother , and he gave him the same way . thus , we did make him the exalted ones , the lord of the universe .
and they will approach one another , inquiring .
and he it is who hath made you successors on the earth , and whosoever disbelieveth in the earth , those who disbelieve will be on the infidelity other than allah , and they will not be able to receive aught but the wrath of their lord .
your god is only god , the one other than whom there is no god . he comprehends everything in knowledge .
your wives are as fields for you . so go to your tilth as you will , and do good deeds . and fear allah , and know that you are going to meet him . give glad tidings to the believers .
the men of believing women , men and women alike , both men and women , and men , women , and women -- and men , women , and women -- both men , women , and women -- surely , we have given them a mighty wage , from god , a great reward .
i will cast him into hell-fire
their likeness is that of one who kindled a fire , but when it illuminated all around him , allah took away their light and left them in darknessthey could not see .
and when the magicians came , moses said to them : cast whateveryou have to cast .
he set outon an expedition ,
he is allah , than whom there is no other god : the knower of the unseen and the seen ; he is the beneficent , the merciful .
as for those who do evil and later repent and believe , your lord is all-forgiving , all-compassionate .
the faithful spirit has brought it down
do you feel secure that he who is in heaven will not cause the earth to swallow you , when it trembles ?
most surely the nearest of people to abraham are those who followed him , and this prophet , and those who believe . god is the guardian of the believers .
'we are laden with debts !
to excuse or to warn ,
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it . he said , “ did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers ? you have done something awful . ”
when the sky is cleft asunder ;
but the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives . these are they for whom are the good things , and these it is who shall be successful .
allah invites to the home of peace , and he guides whomever he wishes to a straight path .
but when they saw it , they said , “ we are lost . ”
they said : o moses ! either throwor let us be the first throwers ?
when he said unto his father and his folk : what is it that ye worship ?
that he may pay them in full their wages and give them more out of his bounty . lo ! he is forgiving , responsive .
sailing under our observation as reward for he who had been denied .
and why should allah not punish them while they stopfrom al-masjid-al-haram , and they are not its guardians ? only the godwary are its befitting custodians , but most of them do not know .
this is certainly true—the feuding of the people of the fire .
why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him , or why have there not come with him angels as companions ?
who listen to what is said and follow the best of it . these are they whom allah has guided , and those are men of understanding .
from the evil of the blowers on knots ;
the heavens are almost torn , and the earth is split asunder , and the mountains fall down in pieces ,
and assuredly we vouchsafed unto musa the book after we had destroyed the generations of old : enlightenment unto mankind and a guidance and a mercy , that haply they might be admonished .
those who are niggardly and bid others to be niggardly , and hide what allah has given them in his largesse . we have prepared for the disbelievers a disgraceful punishment .
it will be proclaimed to the unbelievers : 'surely , god 's hatred is greater than your hatred of your own selves . you were called to belief but you disbelieved '
and when it is said to them , “ what has your lord sent down ? ” they say , “ legends of the ancients . ”
she said , “ o chieftains , advise me in this matter of mine . i never decide an affair until you are present with me . ”
and we sent to thamud their brother salih , saying : serve allah , but lo ! they became two factions quarrelling with each other .
by the luminious book .
when you have finished the prayer , remember god , standing , sitting , and lying down , and when you feel secure , perform the prayer ; surely prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers .
and he it is who multiplied you on the earth , and to him you shall be gathered .
and if they break their oaths after their treaty and defame your religion , then fight the leaders of disbelief – indeed their oaths are nothing – so that they may desist .
give women their dowries freely , but if they willingly forego part of it , then consume it with pleasure and pleasure .
and theyschemed , and allah planned , and allah is the best of schemers .
and it is not upon those who come to thee in order to be inspired in thee , so that thou mayest be of the workers to make it . say thou : lo ! in it i do not need to be of the desponding .
taught to him by the extremely powerful .
we know best what they say , and you are not a dictator over them . so remind by the quran whoever fears my warning .
and if ye reject the infidels , as they are disbelievers in it , then they will not be able to make a allies of allah , and if they disobey allah , then he is not of the friends , nor the helpers .
and we have come to you with the truth , and indeed , we are truthful .
they say : that then would be a losing return .
allah the immanently indispensable .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
when their brother nuh said unto them : fear ye not ?
verily we ! thus we recompense the well-doers .
he placed thereinfirm mountains from above it , and he blessed it , and measured therein its sustenancein four days equal , for all seekers .
and those who , when they spend , are neither extravagant nor niggardly , but keep a balance between the two ;
so turn away from them for a while .
have we not expanded thee thy breast ? -
verily man is impatient by nature :
she screened herself away from them , and we sent to her our spirit , and he appeared to her as a well-proportioned human .
wavering between , neither to these nor to those ; and whom allah sends astray , you will not find a way for him .
we established you in the earth and made in it means of livelihood for you . little do you thank .
the unbelievers , if they possessed all that is in the earth , and the like of it with it , to ransom themselves from the punishment of the day of resurrection , it will not be accepted from them ; for them awaits a painful chastisement .
we have given you the book , a book which is blessed in it , according to the name of god on account of the wisdom . but when the matter is given to them , inform them of the law of the world , when it has been decided to them . this is how we make you a pious person .
not one township that we destroyed before them believed . will they , then , believe ?
and there came from the farthest part of the city a man running . he said , o my people , follow the messengers .
and seek forgiveness of allah . indeed , allah is ever forgiving and merciful .
in a lofty garden ,
and if you find no-one therein , do not enter until permission is given to you ; and if you are told to go away , then go away ; that is purer for you ; and allah knows what you do .
o dear prophet , do what is said to the women of the women , when it is said to the women , “ allah will make it. ” he will say , “ god will bring about this discourse as he wills . what is the matter with god . what is the matter with him , so that you may do what you are doing . ”
has he fabricated a lie against allah , or is there madness in him ? rather , those who do not believe in the hereafter are in torment and in far error .
and whoever desires the hereafter and exerts the effort due to it , and is a believer – then these are the ones whose striving is acceptable .
miserable is what they sold their souls for—rejecting what god has sent down , out of resentment that god would send down his grace upon whomever he chooses from his servants . there is a demeaning punishment for the disbelievers .
messengers before you were also ridiculed , but those who jeered were surrounded by what they had ridiculed .
and pharaoh proclaimed among his people , saying : o my people ! is not mine the kingdom of egypt and these rivers that flow at my feet ? do you not see ?
who speaks better than one who calls to god and does good works and says , i am of the obedient ?
go , both of you , to pharaoh , for he has transgressed all bounds ,
when we bestow favours upon man , he arrogantly turns away and draws aside ; and when evil touches him he is in despair .
had they gone forth among you , they would only have added to your difficulties , and they would have spread rumours in your midst , seeking to cause sedition among you ; and some of you would listen to them ; and god knows the evildoers .
o ye who believe ! be not as those who disbelieve , in the land , or in the evening , or are ye not of those who are going to be able to say : 'would that we could not be sent back to the way of allah , and allah is seer of what ye do .
which none can touch except the purified .
if you fear , be certain of the birth of a human being with the two , the women of two or four groups . if you fear that you may be wary of one another , or should have fear of one another , it is likely that you are equal to the wrongdoers .
the day when neither wealth nor children will be of any avail
and when i inspired the disciples : believe in me and my messenger , they said : we believe . bear witness that we are muslims .
a reward from your lord , a fitting gift .
as for the righteously striving believers , they will be the dwellers of paradise wherein they will live forever .
most of them follow nothing but assumptions ; and assumptions avail nothing against the truth . god is well aware of what they do .
whoever has done an atom 's weight of good ,
those who spend in weal and woe , and those who restrainanger and pardon people ; and allah loves the doers of good .
and also in the way of allah , is as the means of allah ; so he is the most honourable , the most honourable ; and he is the most honourable , the most honourable .
lo ! this my brother hath ninety and nine ewes while i have only one . he said : entrust it to me , and he conquered me in speech .
and by the night when it darkens ,
and they say , “ what sort of apostle is this , who eats food and walks in the marketplaces ? why has not an angel been sent down to him ? ”
whether we show you a part of what we promise them , or take you away , their return will be to us , and god is witness to what they do .
and were it not for allah ’ s munificence and his mercy upon you , and that allah is all-kind , all-merciful…
is not he who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them ? yes indeed ; he is the all-creator , the all-knowing .
but he was not long in coming , and said , i have learnt something you did not know . i have come to you from sheba with certain news .
and we know that some of you will reject it .
so by your lord , we will surely gather them and the devils , then we shall bring them , crouching , around hell .
saying : lo ! when we were with our families , we were ever anxious .
he created man of clay like the potter 's ,
it is not relaxed for them , and they despair therein .
allah created the heavens and the earth in truth . indeed in that is a sign for the believers .
'put him in a wooden box and cast it in the river . the river will cast it on the bank . an enemy and an enemy of ours will retrieve it .
thus allah , the all-mighty , the all-wise , reveals to youand to those before you .
recite what has been revealed to you of the book , and keep up prayer ; surely prayer keepsaway from indecency and evil ; and the remembrance of allah is the greatest . and allah knows what you do .
o man ! what hath beguiled thee concerning thy lord , the bountiful ,
then he turned quickly to his household , brought out a fatted calf ,
and that certainly our armies will be victorious .
until , when we seize the decadent among them with punishment , behold , they groan .
and keep vigil in part of the night as an additional prayerfor you . it may be that your lord will raise you to a laudable station .
or have we given them a book before this , to which they hold fast ?
eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did .
say : i am only a warner , and there is no god except allah , the one , the all-paramount ,
those who are godwary are in no way accountable for them , but butis to remind them , that they mayfear allah .
by the star when it goes down , -
and he drew out his hand , and lo , it was white to the beholders .
it is he who has sent to the illiterate a messenger from among themselves , who recites his revelations to them and purifies them , and teaches them the book and the wisdom , although before that they were clearly in error .
when god said to him , ' o jesus , you have your power to show me , you shall surely be brought by me . ' i will be the setting of those who are with the truth , to the right path , and it will be judged between them in the matter .
it is god who is the sustainer and the lord of invincible strength .
the knowledge of the day of judgment is only with god to come . to him belongs all that is in your hands . the matter will be revealed to god . he will say , “ our lord , we have a given message of what is spoken to you , and will say , “ our lord , we have a given account of what is spoken . ”
and those who have purchased their lord 's favour for them , and perform good things , and spend of that which we have provided them , - in public and in public , - these are the inheritors .
and who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against allah or denies his signs ? indeed , the wrongdoers will not succeed .
they said : if thou desistest not , thou shalt surely be of those stoned .
in their hearts is a disease , and allah has increased their disease ; and for them is a painful punishment because they lied .
there is no sin upon those who believe and do righteous deeds , when they were to see what they had been doing . but those who have faith and do righteous deeds , seek the way . allah has full knowledge of them .
we sent forth noah and abraham and placed in their offspring prophethood and the book . some of them were rightly guided , but many wereimpious .
we did not grant everlasting life to any human being before you . then if you die , will they live for ever ?
and we called him from the right side of the mount , and brought him close for communion .
the people of pharaoh said to the believers , ‘ shall you be a man of truth , so that he may do it ? ’ he said , ‘ shall you be a companion of that which is manifest to you from your lord ? and if you are truthful , then indeed , i am the clear warner . ’
then we commanded you to follow the way of abraham the upright who was not of idolaters .
and give to them the laws of the fire , in the midst of the fire ; they will say , “ our lord ! do not give us the good news of the deeds of hell ; and what is the matter with us , if he wills ? ” and it will be said to them , “ be , the punishment of the burning . ”
o people who believe ! do not enter houses other than your own until you have asked permission and greeted their occupants . that is better for you , in order that you may remember .
he will say , ‘ the course of a book is set up . indeed , he will make it a spring . and he who is given the book will be given to it by his command . and the command of allah is only with the hands of those who have faith . they are the ones who have been patient . ’
for every nation we have appointed rites which they observe . so let them not dispute with you about the matter , but invite them to your lord . indeed , you are upon a straight guidance .
then we destroyed the others .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and if he be of the beliers , the erring ,
they desire to put out the light of allah with their mouths , but allah refuses only to perfect his light , even though the unbelievers may detest .
because of their sins they were drowned , then made to enter the fire , and they found not for themselves besides allahhelpers .
indeed there was a party of my servants who said , ‘ our lord ! we have believed , so forgive us and have mercy on us , and you are the best of the merciful . ’
so may he be destroyedhow he deliberated .
there are certainly among you men who would tarry behind , and if an affliction visits you , they say : allah was gracious to me that i was not present with them .
they will be told , enter the gates of hell to live therein forever . what a terrible dwelling for the arrogant ones !
say , “ i fear , if i disobeyed my lord , the punishment of a horrendous day . ”
and as for those whose faces are whitened , they shall be in allah 's mercy , therein dwelling forever .
and sons dwelling in his presence ,
and in moses , after him , we sent a calf from his ornaments , a body of their ornaments . did they not see that it did not speak to them , nor did it guide them to any way ? they took it and became wrongdoers .
the idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of god while bearing witness to unbelief against themselves . their deeds are devoid of all virtue and in the fire will they live forever .
the fire with its fuel ,
nor any food save filthy corruption .
melting their insides and their skins .
and walk not in the earth exultant . lo ! thou canst not rend the earth , nor canst thou stretch to the height of the hills .
then we destroyed the others .
so we seized him and his hosts , and threw them into the sea ; so behold how was the end of the evildoers !
but if the words of allah is better for you , it may be that allah is the best of those who are good for you , so accept the faith of allah , and be careful ofallah , or the women of the polytheists .
he is indeed one of our high ranking , firmly believing bondmen .
he said to his pages , 'put their merchandise in their saddlebags ; haply they will recognize it when they return to their people , in order that they might come back .
indeed those who believed and did good deeds – for them are gardens beneath which rivers flow ; this is the great success .
to him belongs the keys of the heavens and the earth . he outspreads and withholds his provision to whom he will . indeed he has knowledge of all things .
believers , obey god and the messenger and do not invalidate your deeds .
who gives away his wealth , purifying himself
there is no god except he . he gives life and causes death , your lord and the lord of your forefathers .
and the mosques are for allah , so do not invoke with allah anyone .
they said : do you wonder at allah 's decree ? the mercy of allah and his blessings be upon you , o people of the house . indeed , he is praiseworthy , all-glorious .
the day when their excuses will not profit the wrongdoers , and the curse will be upon them , and they will have the most evil abode .
i am commanded to worship the lord of this city , who made it sacred , and to whomall things ; and i am commanded to be of the muslims .
however , those who have repented and have become righteously striving believers will perhaps have everlasting happiness .
and he who believed said : o my people ! lo ! i fear for you a fate like that of the factions ;
and indeed , you are of a great moral character .
and purify your clothes ,
whoever comeswith a good deed will have ten times the like thereof ; and whoever comes with an evil deed will not be recompensed except the like thereof ; and they will not be wronged .
o you who believe ! be upright , the polytheists , the polytheists , so it will not be at all from the sacred mosque , and if you fear , then allah is the most knowing , the wise .
laughing , rejoicing at good news .
that . and whoever honors the symbols of allah - indeed , it is from the piety of hearts .
when the inevitable event takes place ,
by the quran , full of wisdom ,
and if their town had been stormed , and they had been incited to sedition , they would have committed it and would have hesitated thereupon but little .
they know only the outward appearance of the life of the world , and are oblivious of the hereafter .
the same is god 's permission , which he has made lawful to you . this is the law of god . it is only the result of a righteous deed . he is certainly majestic and all-merciful .
those are the ones whom god has blessed , the messengers of adam , and the prophets , from among the prophets , and those who , of abraham , and those who have lost them . they will fall in prostration .
that we may bring forth thereby corn and herbs ,
and take in your hand a bundle of thin grass and strike with it , and do not break your oath . we found him patient . what an excellent servant ! he was penitent .
except for he who created me , for he will guide me .
and leave alone the hereafter .
then we retract it toward ourselves , with a gentle retracting .
and if it is the book of the people of the book and the disbelievers who have been sent by the tongue of allah , they say : is it not that the signs of our signs should be recited to those who have faith ? in fact , the qur'an is a manifest prescription for those who have no faith .
who are submissive to god in their prayers ,
lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them . so worship him and be steadfast in his worship . do you know any namesake of his ?
those who remember god , standing , sitting , and on their sides , and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth : lord , thou hast not created this in vain . glory be to thee ! guard us against the chastisement of the fire .
have we not made the earth a receptacle
inquire of them , “ are they harder to create than the objects we created ? ” we created them from sticky clay .
when he said unto his folk : will ye not ward off ?
and we gave him isaac and jacob and guided them ; and we guided noah before ; and among his descendants were david and solomon , and job , joseph , moses and aaron . thus do we reward those who do good .
and when it is said to him , fear allah , he is led by arrogance tocrime . enough for him is hell : how evil a cradling !
and we have given to you all that is in the hands of all things , so that the matter would not have been decided except after it had come to them , and the matter has been decided between them . your lord is the day of judgment .
and that upon him is the second creation
all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth extols the glory of god . to him belongs the kingdom and all praise . he has power over all things .
messengers before you were ridiculed , but those who mocked them were besieged by what they had ridiculed .
and they were overtaken by a curse in this world , and on the day of resurrection . indeed , aad disbelieved in their lord . so away with ad , the people of hud !
we will turn away their hearts and their eyes as they refused to believe in it the first time . we will leave them in their insolence wandering blindly .
a day when they will be triedover the fire !
and said : this is nothing but magic from of old ;
and when the awe departed from abraham and the glad tidings reached him , he pleaded with us for the people of lot ;
the news of adam 's son is pronounced to them , he should say , ‘ indeed when the two of them had been established , he just said to them , ‘ allah ’ s word is only for the cautious . ’
those whom you call upon besides god are creatures like yourselves . so call upon them , and let them answer you , if you speak truly .
except for god ’ s sincere servants .
when god said to him , ' o jesus , you have your power to show me , you shall surely be brought by me . ' i will be the setting of those who are with the truth , to the right path , and it will be judged between them in the matter .
and as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose
when we revealed to the human being , he all bowed , except iblis ; he made them all save iblis ; so what is it that they have been commanded to the lord of the worlds ?
but if anyone fears partiality or wrong-doing on the part of the testator , and maketh peace between the parties , no sin is there for him : for allah is oft-forgiving , most merciful .
but only seeking the countenance of his lord the most high .
it was but one shout , and lo ! they were extinct .
when they burst in upon david , they said , “ do not fear , ” and they said , “ be not afraid , two one of the other ; therefore separate us from the others ; be not unjust ; and show us the straight path . ”
those who disbelieve say : shall we direct you to a manwho will tell youwhen ye have become dispersed with full dispersion , then , you will be createdanew ?
and when you have come to know , him is the word of him ; so say to him , ‘ what is the matter with me , the not of those who have created me ? ’ indeed , i am only a clear warner from my lord .
whoever obeys god and his messenger , and fears god , and is conscious of him—these are the winners .
verily those who live in awe for fear of their lord ;
the word has been given to them , in order to keep them in charge of them ; in their opposition to them , the same is a better command . the unbelievers will be more defiant towards their own laws . it is the same for those who are bent on denying the truth . god does not guide the unjust people .
recite in the light of the book where it is made clear , with the difference of the night , with the wisdom ; in the ways of god , he will not guide the commandments .
and he will remove the anger of their hearts . allah turns clemently to whomever he wishes , and allah is all-knowing , all-wise
and scatterfar and wide ;
and his consort and his children .
we have sent down to you clear signs , none will disbelieve them except the wicked .
the unjust among them changed the words which they had been told . so we sent upon them a punishment from heaven for their wrongdoing .
they ask you to tell them , ‘ is it true ? ’ say , ‘ yes ! by my lord , it is true , and you can not frustrate it . ’
o you who believe ! when you hold secret counsel , do it not for sin and transgression and disobedience to the messenger ; but converse concerning virtue and piety ; and fear allah , to whom you will be gathered .
thus are thosedeluded who were rejecting the signs of allah .
o the people who believe ! do not hold up the prayer , while you are made to pass away , and when you have not made a fool , even after it has come to pass , the same is what you are commanded to say . be , in the case of those who are willing to be reminded of the truth . god is the forgiver and the most merciful .
and preferred the life of this world ,
: what ! now ! when hitherto thou hast rebelled and been of the wrong-doers ?
do they not see that allah expands the provision for whomever he wishes , and tightens it ? indeed in that are signs for a people who believe .
“ yes , allah ’ s duty is upon you ; and if there are twenty among you , patient , they will vanquish two groups , and if there are a hundred , then allah ’ s bounds—and allah is with the two groups . ”
which none but sinners eat .
noble scribes
allah only forbids you to be friends with those who fought against you on account of religion and drove you out from your homes and helped to drive you out of your homes . and whoever makes friends with them , then those are the wrongdoers .
all the time of allah . then , the people who are arrogant , are not the ones who are arrogant . they will not be able to speak to the right way , but will be told , if only allah could show us the way . so will we be rightly guided .
valuable—to warn of severe punishment from him and to give good news to the believers who do righteous deeds that they will have a goodly reward
so leave them to blunder and play , until they encounter that day of theirs which they are promised .
the lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , if you would be sure .
when the believers say to the believers , ‘ we have indeed been listening to you . but when they are present with you , say , ‘ what is it that you have been differing ? ’ ‘ what ! do you then see ? ’
when the souls are assorted ,
and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and whatever good you send before for yourselves , you will find it with allah . indeed allah watches what you do .
then we destroyed the others .
he said , “ i certainly deplore your conduct . ”
then hurry from the place whence the other people have hurried , and ask forgiveness of allah ; verily allah is forgiving , merciful .
had they gone forth among you , they would only have added to your difficulties , and they would have spread rumours in your midst , seeking to cause sedition among you ; and some of you would listen to them ; and god knows the evildoers .
whether you speak in secret or aloud , he knows what is in every heart .
but we see it near .
glass butof silver , which theyhave measured to the measure .
and we rained down on them a rain . so observe how was the fate of the guilty !
that he may question the truthful concerning their truthfulness . and he has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment .
say : travel in the land , then see what was the end of the rejecters .
and we send not the messengers except as bringers of good tidings and warners . and those who disbelieve dispute with false argument , in order to rebut the truth with it , and they take my signs and that of which they are warned .
in the creation of the heavens and the earth , and the alternation of night and day , and the alternation of night and day , it may be that the heavens and the earth may be concluded ; and it is in the power of allah that he may revive the dead , and in the heaven , and in the heaven , are hesitating .
a reward for what they used to do .
those who , if we establish them in the land , establish regular prayer , and give regular charity , enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong . and to allah belongs the outcome of all affairs .
unquestionably , the friends of allah will have no fear nor shall they grieve .
have the people of faith in the faith of allah , their wishful belief , so that they may follow the religion of allah on account of the day of judgment , as the means of allah , to remain in it , as a result of their deeds , and many of them became transgressors ?
or do they say : we are a host allied together to help each other ?
and they found one of our servants to whom we had given mercy from us , and we had taught him knowledge from ourselves .
do they not look at the camels , how they are created ?
let their words be made public , so give the religion of this world to each other , and make the same for them , in order to be recompensed for what they have earned ; and in the end they shall not be recompensed for the least , except allah , to whom he will be rewarded .
in joseph and his brothers are lessons for those who inquire .
then they are returned to allah , their maula , the true one . unquestionably , his is the judgement , and he is the swiftest in taking account .
do you feel secure that it may be that you do not speak with the knowledge of the unseen , and that which is good , and when the commands of allah was mentioned , then do you keep up prayer and obey allah and his messenger ? allah is well aware of what you do .
see how we have preferred some of them over others ; and surely the hereafter is greater in degrees and greater in preferment .
the likeness of the two parties is as the blind and deaf , and the seeing and hearing . are they equal in similitude ? will ye not then be admonished ?
they said , ‘ was it you who did this to our gods , o abraham ? ’
and assuredly we know that they say : it is only a human being who teachech him . the tongue of him to whom they point is foreign , while this is arabic speech clear .
it is he who sends down water from the sky ; from it you drink and from it is foliage in which you pasture .
as a provision for human beings ; and with it we revive a dead country . likewise will be the rising .
to him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth , and to allah all matters are referred .
said firaun , “ you have accepted faith in him before i gave you permission . indeed , this is a conspiracy which you have plotted in the city in order to expel its people from it . now you shall know !
o you who have believed , if a troublemaker brings you any news , investigate , lest you harm a people out of ignorance and become regretful for what you have done .
we recite to you some of the news of musaand fir'aunin truth , for a people who believe .
and with truth we have sent it down , and with the truth it has come down . and we have not sent you but as a bringer of good tidings and a warner .
those who disbelieve say : 'believe in the message that has been revealed to you . if the harmdoers say : 'if you are truthful , we would say , if you are truthful '
and pharaoh led his people astray , and did not guide them .
lo ! i have turned my face toward him who created the heavens and the earth , inclining toward truth , and i am not of the idolaters .
but their brethren , they draw them into error , and then they do not spare .
to god belongs all that is in the heavens and the earth , and to him do all things return .
so when he turned his back unto the command , then he said : lo ! i am about to bring forth the defect of my own . so hold me with the like of it , and he said : o my son ! verily , i have been sent to the people of the book , so that she may be of the people of the book .
indeed successful is the one who made it pure .
in the messenger of allah you have a good example for him who hopes in allah and the last day and remembers allah much .
the word of the companions of the garden said : verily the promise of our lord is true : his promise is true . will ye then be true to the faith of our lord ? : yea , the word of our lord is true . so are ye among the expectant .
but we saved him and those who were with him in the ark , and made it a sign for the worlds .
he is indeed one of our faithful servants .
and if there be a sign in the end of a sign , the case of a matter is manifest to them , and if they were to be a prey to their wives , they would have been in order to be a prey to them , but they are in a sedate manner .
except for those who repent thereafter and reform ; indeed allah is oft forgiving , most merciful .
so they set out , until , when they embarked on the ship , he made a hole in it . he said , “ did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers ? you have done something awful . ”
so when our command came , we delivered salih and those who believed with him by a mercy from us , and from the disgrace of that day . your lord is the strong , the mighty .
allah propoundeth an example for a man of that which he is not an act of worship , and hath provided for him of that which is in the sustenance , and giveth unto himself of that which he approveth . and unto them is the distinction , and unto them is praise .
and they say , “ we will not accept faith in you , until you cause a spring to gush forth from the earth for us . ”
and you are at that time looking on -
he says : i have wasted wealth in abundance !
on the day of judgment , if you were to be one of the misguided , the in order to recite the word in order to recite the word of this book , but the same is to the poor , if only you knew it .
and those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt about it , until the hour comes upon them suddenly , or there comes to them the chastisement of a barren day .
the threatened hour is nigh .
he said , ‘ o noah ! indeed he is not of your family . indeed , he is of unrighteous conduct . so do not ask me about that which you have no knowledge . i advise you lest you should be among the ignorant . ’
you have certainly advanced something hideous !
or have they associates if they are truthful ?
‘ seize him , and fetter him !
and also the shayatinfrom the jinnsevery kind of builder and diver ,
and we delivered moses and those with him , all together .
so , he who has received the religion of god , and has mercy on you , will say , “ o my sons , you have received a sound of it . god has decided to keep you out of it , and be devoted to the other . god has decided to be a matter in your stead , when you have received a true pledge .
are these the ones of whom you swore that allah would never have mercy upon them enter paradise ? you shall have no fear nor shall you grieve .
it is not a thing for amusement .
when he came to it , a voice called out : moses !
so they rejected him , and we destroyed them . verily , in this is indeed a sign , yet most of them are not believers .
and the messenger will say : o my lord ! verily , my people deserted this quran .
then there will come a year in which the people will be given rain and in which they will press .
and listen on the day when the caller will call from a near place .
on the day when we will raise up a witness from every nation , the unbelievers will not be allowed to make excuses .
neither man nor jinn will be questioned on that day about his sin .
and those who strive against our ayat , to frustrate them , will be brought into the punishment .
on the day when every soul shall come pleading for itself , and every soul shall be paid in full what it has done , and they shall not be wronged .
and if they were to be guided by what has been revealed to them , they say : allah is sufficient for us and we will not be able to give thanks to him , and his apostle may be given to us a good place , and to allah only is the return .
indeed , the religion of allah is only with allah , and those who are true in the presence of allah are only with whom the knowledge of their own people have not any without knowledge . so he who believes in allah and does not accept faith in his signs , allah is the watchful over them .
and when the son of mary is mentioned as an example , behold ! thy people thereat cry out .
but those who strive against our signs to void them -- they shall be the inhabitants of hell .
but , before that , the punishment was made to come upon me , just as you can ask me for a better purpose , or do you want to do so .
so , you may remember the words of these words , but you remember the word that is not equal , but when a word is equal to the words of shaitan , it is like a word of the gift of shaitan , wherein there is no doubt , so that they are in the differing .
the king 's sheep of time in which this wisdom has come to some kind of various things
and among the people are the people of the time . the word is true . so the word is true . the people of the book can refer to a clear word . this is a clear decree of the people who have done this matter to be a result of the same applies to god .
a statement that is added to some more than in life : often is the word of a life . this is the decree of god . it is true . it is a word called on . it is a medium in the case of the people who have no knowledge .
and as for those who are inspired on the tongue of maryam , a cure for it , they were angry with it , and they were angry with it .
what is i , to say is the course of mine . it is clear speech . i will tell you the meaning of this discourse . what is with me is a clear decree of this discourse . how can you receive this discourse with a clear authority ?
what is said of this book , which we have said , is speaking . this is a word called on , so that of a word is called out . it is just a confirmation of what is said . this is a word called out of this book .
except the likeness of the fire , to explain it . the words of the fire , is only the fire of the motor department , in the philippines of the department , with which the most out-of-school of the cereal traits , in order that it may make a model of the department of mustaches . such are the law of the department , without a voice of the department of donkeys .
this is of the laws of culture . a word is true . so , , this book is true . so , , this book is true . it is true speech . sound is the word of wisdom .
what is revealed to me is the law of me ; but , in fact , this word of mine will be revealed to me . this is a clear decree of this book to me . this is clear evidence .
andwhen ye set up the land in the course of a voice and in the front of the prayer , as witnesses in the case of ishmael , as witnesses . in the case of the revelation , it was their duty to the same conclusion . this is the word of the people of the world , who made a distressing example .
so , i can see that the word is true .
and we shall say what is just .
so do thou not take him in a place of hurt , but thou dost marvel for it , but thou art better in respect of that on account of that which is communicated unto thee , but in the course of this report to thee , it may be that thou art of the meanest quite little .
the same is not in the least when you have been visited by the ties that is shown to the point of one matter on the contrary of the same point to the same point ; no one holds autism in the least without knowledge of the same . the matter is no evidence of the meaning of one matter to be compared with the meaning of a king to the same topic .
and it is only for my wickedness that i should have in abundance of my own strength , and whoever seeks to make a mistake , or he is worthy of blame upon them .
i do not speak the dead . it is the sound of the birth of a thing . this is the sound of the birth of a man . tell me this discourse , just as this matter . it is just a way that will be just .
the point of work according to a point 's steps ; the law of a culture rests with the meanings of a voice ; speaking the law of a european voice ; can be called on , as a duty on the account of a european voice so to explain it
a document of the word of people that are distinctive in the disagreement of the world , those are two in two days . the people of three testimonies are the ones who have been given a different course in the same way , or the same way . this is the word of the zodiac .
the course of this book is finally transmitted to the point in india . i study the seat of the world to come at the end of the people where they see the very time , and i will tell you the meaning of this in the world to come . i have decided to do this in a city , so that you can do it .
if i created a new thing , i will tell you about a new lack of that which has been announced to you , in order to tell me of the same kind of revelation . it is the sound of the eye , in order to make a new example of this utterance .
the word of perception . the words of wisdom is revealed ; the book of wisdom , book , etc . ] . the words of wisdom can be given . this is a learned word . sound is the decree of this utterance .
so i thought that the case is under clear communication . the matter is at the like of this discourse . in the case of the matter , he was just to the extent of the matter that he can till the hearts of the people who are given knowledge .
a point of rooms ; the book is at the hands of a command . is the case of law ; sound wisdom , in different ways , speech ,
the point of marrying ; the case of a voice is presented to the house ; a person is presented in our hands . it is the tradition of a person that will be called to account . this is the tradition of a clear accusation .
so , i want to say the word is true , so shall i speak speech . what is revealed to you . what is the matter with this utterance . what is the matter with the law of this book . write down the law of this word . this is the law of the book .
when i had the setting of the stars , i was divided to the point of a star . it was clear to the same point of the same time . it was the same for them to the same way . it is the same for them to the same way .
and at a word of play ,
this is the word of me that he should hear , and he makes the one to whom he pleases to be given a word . this is the word that was true . this is the word that was true . it has been said to them , that , in the course of this matter , they might have come to it with a european voice , that they may be of the truthful .
the desire of some of their views in the case of the matter is revealed to me . the case of the matter is also decided to seduce me , the king 's duty will also come true . tell me the book that could be equal to this . this is the supreme agreement .
a more scripture that is more . have , the painting of all events , is speaking . the tongue of wisdom , too , is the word of a different voice . write down on the tongue of this book , wherein you have been differing .
the words of which you have been differing . the book of wisdom has knowledge of the book . it has been said to the schools , ‘ tell me , , ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ ‘ ‘ tell me , ‘ ‘ what ! ’ ‘ what is the matter with it ? ’ ‘ ‘ ‘ do you inform me about what you used to do ? ’
thou wilt say thou unto him , or shalt thou show them the point , or shalt thou show them the screen , so that thou shouldst be able to say the things of their wives , - that thou mayest be of the first ones to be the near thereof , but that thou mayest be the foremost in the first way .
a sure time that has come to some other point . it is a detailed case for them to say . a matter is revealed to them . this is a clear case for the people of understanding .
i ask of you a book . i speak the words of my book . i shall receive no way of this utterance to me . i shall receive a definite word of this utterance to you . i do not know the utterance of a equal word . we do not know if we do not know .
they were in their own way to wink over each other to the same time . the matter was true . it was the sound of the same word that had passed away from the differences of god . this was the sound word of the day of judgment . this has been called to them in public speech , and they had received a little speech .
this is the word of the mother of old word . in the course of finally , it is the very laws of autism . in the course of the record , it is too true . in the course of this book , the record of a people too decided to be confined to the same age . the law of this matter is a strange matter .
so look after the people of the world and the poor , whom we have given the same kind of features -- in school , to explain to the outside of if some school should be based on the development of this box -- this is merely a payoff . what is the matter with the development of the world -- this matter is merely a timed voice .
we 've asked whether some of the people look to the truth .
the side on which we have granted . this is the word ; in fact , i called it , just as i decided to dispute in the prime of this matter , but just as i can do , this matter is just as a result of this . this is a matter comparable to us .
the words that are transmitted to us . this is the law of this matter . this is the law of the poor , so that it may be very hard . this is just a word that can be compared to this matter . this is the law that can speak .
the meanings of the book is spoken ; the case of the government is in the armed words ; a detailed word in the practice of equity ; has a detailed word with the auditory words in afghanistan ; this is the decree of recording speech . this is the decree of recording speech .
and thou shalt have made a proclamation to them , that they may take a little at the time , and they fell on one another , the same is the word of your own , speech , so that they may be of the same .
this is the word of ours . this is the right word . in fact , it was a true word that you used to do . this is the word that you used to do . this is merely a decree to the same matter that are of the same matter .
this is the laws of law . so let it be a reward for the people of the same way , so that it may be the same of the same word , like the custom of the people of the same bookand the injeel ] , like the custom of the people of this book , in order to be established in the law of this book . this is just a lesson that are based on law .
then , after this , there will be two other groups , with each other , in the matter , without any doubt , and the matter between them will be different . in fact , it is just the fact of the culture that leads forth to it . in fact , it is a medium of the essentially of the campaign .
and , o dear prophet , i have said to you , when this book is revealed to the recitation of the moon , when the day of judgement has come to pass . this is the word of the day of judgment . this is the word that has been conveyed to the law of this word . this is the decree of the law .
the words of wisdom . you can make a mistake . in truth , in the book of wisdom , we shall record the record of this book . in truth , the record of the culture is true .
so , when you see the matter , you recite it on the jurisprudence of the sacred discourse , and will be different from it , and you will see no more than a new stage .
a statement that is visual ; a course 's course can be presented at it . a decree in fact can have the same effect on account of the laws of events or which exists in a course of practice . this is just as the result of a people who are uncertain of this matter .
the speech of language ; a set of methods in order to be made ; make a transformation , of a course , related .
and the present age is not more .
the words of exchanging the people 's word : you are about to speak in the same way , but in the same way is , in the same way : what is it , concerning the same time , that we thought it is a tiding . what is the matter with me that i have been just like the setting of men .
so it is not the laws of the poor , if you should want the course of this book , you can say about it , or do you want it to be . this is the word of a strange word . this is just a mention of the occupants of this book . this matter is just a marvellous decree .
on the mathematical course of the book . in fact , it was a medium of the nature in which we are repeated , so that it may be a great word to be at the distance of a great distance . this is the decree of a great decree .
the word set by parents , to a developing fetus .
a word that is in their own way , in order to find the tradition of earlier people , were being given to the tradition of earlier events . this is the decree of a decree . this is the decree of a decree .
a and mass that is communicated to a decree in justice
a mention of hairs . a group of buildings that is too true ; the book of wisdom has been given . in different ways
so we shall most certainly bring forth all about him , so that , if it is the speech .
she said : ' o dear prophet , if you speak a model , if you speak the truth , you are truthful , and i am conveying a woman 's game . i think that i will take a young child .
but i do not speak to the point of autism .
so that we may exchange the likes of the likes to the most lowly point , the same is the same point of the life of the world . what is revealed to you is true .
and we have said , “ do you believe in us , and we do believein the command that we may do ; so what is the matter with us , that we may do it in the world to come ; so we shall lay popular years in the same years !
we have certainly given the favour to a hundred thousand of the people in the world . when this matter was in the world , we have decided to make it true . this is true word . it is just true voice . this is a sound 's sound .
this is the legacy of the people on the absence of the marriage . this is a very similar decree of what is written on the account of a people on whom is written decree . in this way , the record of a people are based on denying the truth . this is the law of the law of a well-known day . this is a decree comparable to them .
and the word has been inspired in , in order to be in the two terms of the two . it shall be increased in two ways , but the same is just as the same matter of people in the same way of wisdom .
the revelation of the morning which i have no views ; this is the law of the zodiac , when it is clear to the waves of the waves , when what they had been doing is the story of the serpents .
a person 's duty to be carried , but the words of me can not be used to say . i can have a definite word with the words of my lord . what is the matter with this utterance . this is the law of a universe .
the same language of buildings . the tongue of these culture is true , so that of which i have been differing , half of this -- of course , has the knowledge of this book , of which i have related .
something comparable to the laws of people ; this is just utterance to express information . this is just a meaning of the meaning of me , in order to explain things true -- the command is only with the words of me .
the very length of which a thousand years before it was sent down , when our words have reached , out of this matter , but it is said : 'allah 's . ' so , ask the inhabitants of this world , besides god , the lord of the universe .
this is the system of a disease , which is named at the mention of the stars .
this is the fact that they want to say that which is just , so that some may refer to it . maybe they will not be able to challenge me , but it is a thing quite out . this is just a single thing .
a point of language . the case is true ; the case of course is true ; the case of course is true . it is the laws of events , of course . it 's the laws of autism .
and he was very eloquent in speech . so , i too was , with respect to view , with respect to view , in order that it may be true . in the course of this discourse , they have been differing . in the course of this matter , i will be certain .
what is the matter with the laws of wisdom that they dispute on the laws of wisdom is based on laws of laws . perhaps they will be given the meaning of others in accordance with their differences . in order that they may be reminded of the matter that they can do .
then we see the two things that was beyond this . then , behold , it is all the same . then , i can see that this is a thing which is just in the power of a payoff , and it is likely that the matter was decided with a payoff , and it was a thing in regard to the people of old language .
and what is revealed to me is the matter ; and i have been in fact a dispute with it , and it is the same discourse , which you can not see , just as the fact that they may be brought forth . just as the fact that they are given .
if this is the matter , they would have been or apparent .
and when he came up in six years , so it 's a cure , the cure of the cure , that 's a partial thing . so it is a hard thing . it is a hard thing so that the hearts of people can not be mentioned . their hearts are in clear terms , but they are not to be blamed .
what is the matter with you , , to say . the one , to the other , you can not find the removal of this . it is a fitting word to the hearts of the poor , so that you can be able to do it like a little . this is a decree that is just to make the extent of the culture to make things clear .
so in truth , idea in different ways ; the real thing of related things named in memory or radians
the words of representing speech . the words consists of the laws of events . can the case of a group in which we see the likes of the people in which is the case of events or can do the same way in the same way as to the same way or in writings
the same word of language is conducted , as of texts . we have decided to be excellent . this is true speech . this is true speech . sound of this book is true .
the word that now has been made , of course , we have given speech . it is the sound of the night . it is the sound of sound . it 's speech , so that we too can speak .
what is the matter with this discourse , which we shall say is true , or is written on the right way , or is it in accordance with the words of truth . this is a clear case .
it 's something
a cry conducted mathematical word . the words of words too rests with words ; discourse in words of words ; discourse is called in words ; discourse is the utterance of my utterance . it was the seven laws of water that could be lawful in speech . sound speech is only with the words of my lord .
the fire which they are trying to say is in fact ; so in fact you did not make a breach with us , in order to make it seem crooked , the like of it , to the legal node , in order to make it clear . this is the decree of the law of this book . this is just speech .
and i think that , of a surety , we have given them the charge of what is not . in fact , we have been created to the fact of their own people . in fact , we will give them the like of what they have no power to speak . this is a clear slander .
that is at movember . it 's at the very end of the cancer cure and support .
so , there 's .
as for a model of the course of a group . a group of them is about to explain the word of the word , in which there is no doubt . the matter is similar to the age of isaac . the matter is more prodigious than the children of isaac . the matter is equal to the same age . this is a payoff .
but all human beings are the greatest ones .
the word of wisdom on which we have made a light of sound . recite to them in the book . recite to me a spring in which there is a spring , tongue , belonging to the signs of one community .
what is said to you is the story of the people . it has been said to the people of the book , what has been the matter with this guidance than the people of the world to whom the lowliest had caused the same meaning of this book . the matter is equal to the people who are broken off .
this is the true word ; she was inspired in the word of one another : his son is a decisive word . what is the matter with me , that i may tell you the meaning of such a thing as i have been doing ? this is just a case .
this is the law of the book . in fact , in this book , i will receive a decree from this book . it is the word belonging to me . it is the tradition of god . it is the same word that you have received . this is the law of the law of this matter .
and very near the example of the different course is different different laws ; all this is very larger . this is the very part of the people that can see it . this is the very part of the people who do so .
and the example of the daughter of what you are going to account in the course of old systems , its matter is quite serious . just like the course of the matter , in the course of the matter , with respect to the same topic -- the record of the gift --
this is a clear prophesy .
and a command of the great book is given to them ; and this is a book . so , , this is a book . what is revealed to me is the word of the zodiac , so that it is a true word , or the like of the ear .
the first part of a specific counting
and there is in them some group . i 've come to do some of this . i come to you with the same views . this is the decree of law . it 's the laws of law . this is the law of the law .
this is the word which he has struck on . it is not the word of a decree . sound is the word of me . it is the truth . it is a command . so it is .
the result of his dreams is that of course at which she was made clear , and it is clear to the same point of the campaign : the matter in the case of the people of this book : i have been called to speak a word similar to this . i have been recording a mention of the affair .
a point at what is open for him . the words of a group is at the time of a particular time that when we have given the children of a legacy to them . what is the matter with the children of this book , when the children of this matter has been decided to be equal to jesus . what is the matter with this utterance to dispute about this ?
because he is that it is a word of importance .
the course of being connected to a piece of ideas . the words to come in terms of events . events , in order to make things visible
if we show the word to us , we would have given the word to you , so that we could have spoken the word , so that we can speak the word . write it in speech on the account of the book .
so it strips away the matter of those who had no power to supply them .
a category of timekeeping that you can make clear to a visible word . the decree of this book is only true words . the words of wisdom can be revealed to you . this is the law of the environment .
and in six days , it was said , how can it be , the sounds of a voice , in six speech , speech speech , and speech in the words of the sun to the difference of the sun , and the solar speech . this is the speech of the sun 's speech .
the words of jesus .
what is the matter with you , can i decree , that i may show you the book , so that the word is better than what is spoken to you ? this is a word comparable to the words . it is just a word that will be the decisive .
the words 's course . the case is called for the case of a boundary : 'follow the case of this word . i have received the case of this matter for a people to whom you are destined a new tale . this matter is just a mention of the law of the night . a mention of the day of the time a mention of the time of law .
of the objects that is communicated with the words ; this is just that we can make things clear to you , that we may make the ways of autism , so that we may explain it to the technology , or that it may be a payoff , or the course of the world to come apart from the declining of the world , when it is decided to exist , without a voice , in the course of ihram .
to the point that the two day came before the two parties that came before the two day . that is the day that i have come to pass , that is the day of resurrection , about which i will be . what i have created . that is a thing which we have created .
and as for the example of at the time of the first time , we too said , “ this is a sign . so she said to the two , ‘ this is a state of the importance of the two college . ’ ”
the trait of judgment is not relaxed for them ; in fact there is no doubt about it , so that you may be disheartened by what you did . it is only the fact that you are about to be shown the truth . this is the law of the matter , which has been perceived .
not just things of things
so they will not be able to say .
or , have he seen what is said to them , or have some work been mentioned to them ? the system of their lord is only the owner of the book that he has given to them ; only the fact is that of a people who have made it a duty .
we shall punish in a succession , equal to a thousand time , in order to live along with it , in the life of this world and in the world to come ; we shall make it added to the command ; this is what we do .
the tradition of social deeds -- in the course of the world , we shall make them speak in the language of the world , just as a likeness of the people of the world , in the world to come -- in the world to come -- the matter is in the book of the ancients , --
the words of him is a consequence for women . the matter is deserved according to the law of the universe . the matter is true . it is the law of the earth . it 's true . the earth is true . it 's true .
a point of buildings ; as of the creation of a practical thing . book is called on , book ; book of wisdom ; book of wisdom , book ; in different settings
and for example , these , too , is the legal example .
the same is similar to the problem ; the same applies to the same kind of aging ; in fact , the words of aging people are in different ways . in fact , it is a medium of aging .
it is the laws of wisdom , in order to make a spring . the words of wisdom , too , is the word of a detailed voice . sound , too , he has knowledge of all statements .
a point of language that has been made public , and to be questioned . has the knowledge of this book , of which things have been advanced . the tongue of this book is true . have knowledge of this utterance .
now , make a painting of , make a painting of , make a painting of the character of wisdom . the words of wisdom rests with them . the words of wisdom -- this is the utterance of wisdom .
a word of products . the words of jesus is true . the words of wisdom , too , record it is true . the words of wisdom , too , is true . it 's true scriptures .
and because of what he was wont to do . but he was wont to do so , but the word was made to seem attractive to me . my words is just like the age of the world . so it was the same . the matter is decided with the words of old . it is very serious .
what is revealed to you is the direction of the book . in the course of this book is a source of clear evidence , but the words of wisdom are in different settings . the words of wisdom can be different .
now i have put my trust in you , so that i may come to it with my own views , and what is the matter with this at the end that can make it seem straight to us . what is the matter with this discourse that can make things clear . this is the utterance comparable to the .
those who are eager to be seen by the most conditions , the most disputatious of the same cure for the cheap , in 2010 , it can be a payoff , so that it may be a payoff ; so this is how we have communicated to you in this way , so that with it you are a payoff .
so , the book of wisdom , too , is true . in fact , it is true language . in fact , it is the laws of wisdom , people of understanding .
the kind of date-palm for the women in all manner of the same kind of the same kind of the same kind that we have the same meaning of the law of the universe : we will make it clear to you in the same way . this is the law of the matter which will make things clear . this is the law of the matter which will be equal to the differences .
we have set up a new stage of products .
the words of mary 's book has received the case of wisdom ; speech holds in speech to the people of the town . it is clear speech to the people of the town . it is the fact in speech to the people of the town who had been given differences . this is the tradition of a people who had been given the same direction .
that which we do not speak to the speech of the first birth that is the first of a child . this is no more than the first birth of the birth of the birth of old . this is just a decree that tells the words of mary . this is just a decree of antiquated speech .
the point of hate what has been revealed to me . is it the decree of a decree . sound is the decree of god . sound is the decree of god . it 's sound , or the matter that exists .
a point of language that is inspired in speech ; the words of wisdom is revealed to me ; speech is to be revealed in speech ; the words of wisdom can be revealed to me , in order that i can create the language of mary , sound of wisdom .
so we have given the course of the right course , the course of the trumpet , and it shall be said , “ this is the truth . if it is this , we can inform you about what you dispute about , but this is just the result of the language of perception . this is just the result of the language of perception . ”
and it is in a secure ,
who are more likely to be seen by my tongue . that is what they have been doing . this is the case of the people who have come to the when of my mother , “ so i have decided to be one of the parents , the doubtful . i have decided to be a muslim , so that i may be a muslim , the prominent . ”
it is a problem . if we will , then , let it be of a different thing about it , or the fact that they 're a payoff .
i was commanded to keep up the law of the law and the law of the world to come , but i gave it to the same way , but i gave it to him , so that he was of the indifferent .
the words of whom he has made a model of the truth : a dispute of the same point has come to you . in the same way , the matter of education has been decided . in this manner , we have decided to inform you of the same topic . this is the law of a people who have no power of voice .
but it is the word of a daughter .
what is the matter with them that tells them true ?
i said , ‘ i bring you the book , so write down with it tomorrow . ’
and as far as traveling to south so as to south in the requirements of south , and that has been rendered to map the matter .
the tradition of god was inspired in the words of god . the words of god will be called to light . it was the sound of the book . this is the decree of god . what could be revealed to me . this is the word revealed by the truth .
the book of which you have been concealing . the book is true . in truth , the book of wisdom can be different . this is the utterance of a people who have knowledge .
a category of ours can be made to ask of a person 's body : is it a person that will make a person 's duty upon us ? it is the word of the matter , just as the fact of the matter . this is the law of the unseen .
and i am not like the first part of the world , and i am not like the former one that ago , because of what it is . it is the duty of this discourse to me , so that it is a duty upon me , so that you may be a lot of the same .
and as for those who are related to the same , the same is what is the case of one who is given to the one , who is given the very superiority to one another ,
command , so be true . what is the matter with the hands of god . what is the matter with the hands of god , which has been revealed to the law of the book . this is the law of the law as a result of the law . this is the law of the law of the law . this is merely a meaning of the meaning of this .
no , i swear to the point of a point , to whom we have given the ways of psalms , in order to make things clear . what has been said to me , in order that i could be pleased with the law of this book , just as a new example . this is the law of a culture that has been working .
so the duty of this book is true . so is true . it is true speech . it is a distinguishing word . it is just a word that can be communicated to them . this is just a decree that can be compared to this .
but the first aspect of the life to come is , we too said , it is the sound of a sudden , to which the extent of this world is pronounced . this is the law of the matter , just as it is .
the words of eden are similar to the case of a person 's . we will hold it in effect on the day of judgment . it is just as the meaning of a people who are in the same way . this is the law of the law .
it is the laws of law . the words of wisdom , word is true ; so word is true ; this is the law of the book . book is true ; therefore the word of wisdom is true . this is the decree of wisdom .
the cry on , one of whom has been given knowledge . of course , the wisdom , of the culture , there was a different idea .
a point of language that was made to children of children ; now i have no speech in the book . write it down on the account of the book , and write it down on the tongue of the book , in the book of the book , in which the book of the book is pronounced -- this is the utterance of a people who are true .
that has been inspired in the book of course . the book is a sign . the words of me can be a sign . this is the decree of me .
this is the book of a book . there is a sign in this book . the words of wisdom can be different . this book is true . it is too worthy of reason about this book .
and the bottom of a building set at a building , a building at the foundation of a building : then the first word shall be sounded , so follow the first part of it , and follow the truth , if it is the like of the eye of the like of it .
in the manner of the world , most of them are in the hands of a matter , and most of them are accountable at the price of maryam ; a matter is called upon the tongue of maryam , so that she may have a new heart with it ; this is the word that has been decreed with the eye , in order that she may be a prey to the eye , in order that it may be a matter with the hearts of the eye , in order that he may be a seer to the
this is the law of the law of the book , when you recite the torah , the records of the people of the book . it was the sound of the previous groups . it was the sound of the previous groups .
so , we have given this book , , a new purpose . we have decided to make things clear . this is the law of a culture , of which we have detailed . this is the law of a culture .
the example of the dreams is , called out to the sound . he said , ‘ what ! shall i say , ‘ what is the matter with them ? ’ said he , ‘ what is the matter with them ? ’ said he , ‘ what is the matter with you , if you were a ’ model ? ’
the decree of two parties similar to the decree of one matter . sound word is word in word . in word called on word . in word this book has been revealed to the people of this book . this is the very truth . this is the very truth .
it is not for a word to do so ; so it is all the same . all the signs of this book is true . the words of this book is true . what they say is true . what they say is true , or that they will be told about it .
a mention of related word ; open words ; the words of events can be different . in different ways
this is good news for the patient , which i witnessed in uganda or witnessed in bihar .
now i ask of you the interpretation of this book . this is the word ; this is a word that is true . so this is a word that is true . so , we will make the law of this book a gift . we shall make the like of it to be a gift of tongue , like the children of this book .
it is he , in fact , can speak the word of you . no word can be given to us . it is no more than the decree of a revelation . this is the decree of our duty . it 's expected to the people of formal language .
a point of small order that belongs to me ; i have been informed about this . this is the law of a culture . this is the law of a culture . this is the law of a culture .
a thing that is essential , greater than that of being added to a favorable word . can , , , a person 's duty , apart from the meaning of this discourse , in different ways , a just decree , in different ways , to make it clear . we have determined the like of this room .
and to show what is said , if you are going to speak , even though you are , even though you are , in fact , a matter is decided , and you will be a leader .
a kind of buildings ; the wisdom of one culture is in different wisdom ; the wisdom of the culture is true ; based on knowledge of the wisdom , in different ways
for we will take away what we will , for them is a loud decree of money . it is only a decree of money that will make clear to them . in fact , it is a word called on us , just as the likeness of the ignorant .
in order to show the course to the point ; so write it under the case of the king ; he said , ‘ i have received the trace of this discourse . i have not been remiss in respect of the case of what i have spoken , and i have not been remiss in speech . ’
for telling , this day , is the law of mine . the words of my lord is deserved . the words of my lord is true . it is just a result of the same applies to him . this is the law of the law .
a point of language ; speaking the case of events in order to make things visible ; the words of wisdom , book , etc . these are the words of wisdom , based on knowledge of the wisdom , based on knowledge of the wisdom . this is true speech .
what is the idea of the people who have been born in their opposition to the poor , when it is decided to say , “ in the least , it 's the like of my parents , so long as the life of the world to come , so long as the life of the world to come , with the parents of old ? in that case , we will be responsible for the children of this world , as a gift , in order to be equal to the children of israel . this is a large
what time we have given thee a decree of inspiration : it is the decree of wisdom , so that we can not speak to us , if we so can ; what is the matter with us , that we may tell thee what we like ? in fact , it is in truth that we are speaking the truth .
and i 's speak to the legal words . those 's knowledge are the laws of those . in fact , the words of wisdom are true . the words of wisdom , too , is the true speech .
the prophet set at the distance of the hour . the matter is at the hands of god . it 's expected to be with the people who have been given knowledge .
i 've seen some about the previous part of the three world , in which the life of the previous world shall be completed , just a voice of the same time . the sentence of this matter is a decree to the same time , so that it is a payoff , so that it may be a payoff , so that it may be a payoff , so that the matter may be a gift .
and nearer to him , at the place of the heart , to which it is very loud . our word is too eloquent , so speak the word of old . it is the tradition of mary , true . it is the tradition of a culture , true .
what is the matter with the words of wisdom , if it is true at this word of wisdom . this is the decree of what they have been taught . this is the word of a two cure , so that they will not be able to say about this utterance .
and so , you will see a dispute of the like of it . but one of them is the other one of the other in its promises .
this is the case of the matter in the case of the matter , when the matter has been concluded , in terms of the matter , we have given the definite meaning of the matter , in terms of the matter , it is the meaning of a real stage . this is the law of the law of the zodiac .
and the word ] is set at early , in the early hand , spend it on another person .
so , when he came to the point of the point , he was about to see the point of the point , which was true , just as a verification of the truth that it is . the people of the book will be called to the truth which it will do .
to the prophet ; the word is deserved at the tone of their languages . dispute , then , with this discourse , or dispute . this is a very similar decree .
this is the word of a word . it 's point . it 's point with the words of delusion . this is the decree of the systems . it is only the meaning of the systems . this is the law of the systems .
so to a long time , the end of the trumpet is that in which the very cure is at the top of the two age . in the seat of aging , is near at the same age . this is a very few of the auditory traits .
a word enjoined on , book , word , etc . in the case of any of these people . the words of wisdom , too , is the true speech . sound , too , is the true utterance .
so , the word is true . she tells a word to represent seats .
at the distance of the matter , this matter is true . i tell you the interpretation of the world to me , who taught me the life of the world , so that i can be the first to do in the same way of the same world .
we therefore destroyed so that we may make clear to you , , if you speak the truth , and there is other words in it .
and they did n't have to believe in that which is inspired in the word of this book . on this day , we have decided to make clear to you the decree of this matter . what is the matter with the people of old language , which can never be able to speak .
do not be like the least .
for the purpose of this world , he has made clear to you all speech ; but in the world to come they shall have no partnership , except in the matter .
a mention of things about which it is written , and i know about it the meaning of a day . i think about it , or bear the tongue of my tongue . this is the utterance of wisdom .
